<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">
<TEI.2 lang="en">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title>The Count of the Saxon Shore</title>
                <author><name reg="Church, Alfred John">Alfred John Church</name></author>
            </titleStmt>
            <publicationStmt>
                <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
                <date value="2013-10-31">October 31, 2013</date>
                <idno type='etext-no'>44083</idno>
                <availability>
                  <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere
                  at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever.
                  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
                  the terms of the Project Gutenberg License online at
                  www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
                </availability>
            </publicationStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
                <bibl>
<title>The Count of the Saxon Shore.</title>
                <author><name reg="Church, Alfred John">Alfred John Church</name></author>
<imprint><pubPlace>London</pubPlace>
<publisher>Seeley, Service &amp; Co.</publisher></imprint>
</bibl>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
        <encodingDesc>
        </encodingDesc>
        <profileDesc>
          <langUsage>
            <language id="it" />
            <language id="fr" />
            <language id="en" />
<language id="la" >Latin</language>
          </langUsage>
        </profileDesc>
        <revisionDesc>
          <change>
            <date value="2013-10-32">October 31, 2013</date>
            <respStmt>
                <resp>Produced by sp1nd, Stefan Cramme, and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by
The Internet Archive)</resp>
            </respStmt>
            <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
          </change>
        </revisionDesc>
    </teiHeader>

    <pgExtensions>
      <pgStyleSheet>
        .ill         { margin-left: 2 }
        .italic      { font-style: italic }
        .small       { font-size: 75% }    
        .smaller     { font-size: 100% }            
        .smallcaps   { font-variant: small-caps }
        head         { text-align: center }
        figure       { text-align: center }
        lg           { margin-left: 2 }  
        .w80         { }
        .w100        { }
        @media pdf   {
        .w80         { width: 80%; page-float: 'htp' }
        .w100        { width: 100%; page-float: 'htp' }
                       }                 
      </pgStyleSheet>
<pgCharMap formats="txt">
        <char id="U0x2009">
          <charName>thinsp</charName>
          <desc>THIN SPACE</desc>
          <mapping></mapping>
        </char>
      </pgCharMap>
    </pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
<front>
<div>
<divGen type="pgheader" />
</div>
<div>
<divGen type="encodingDesc" />
</div>
<div>
<pb/>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: The Burning of the Villa.]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><anchor id="frontis"/><figure url="images/i_002.jpg" rend="w80"><index index="fig" level1="The Burning of the Villa"/>
<head><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Burning of the Villa.</hi></head>
<figDesc>The Burning of the Villa</figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<pgIf output="html">
<then><p><figure url="images/cover.jpg"><figDesc>Cover image</figDesc></figure></p></then></pgIf>
</div><titlePage rend="page-break-before: always; text-align: center">
<pb/><anchor id='Pgi'/>
<docTitle>
  <titlePart type="main" rend="font-size: xx-large">The <hi rend='smallcaps'>Count</hi>
<lb/>of the <hi rend='smallcaps'>Saxon Shore</hi></titlePart>
<lb/>
<titlePart type="sub"><hi rend='italic'>or</hi><lb/>
<hi rend="font-size: x-large">The Villa in VECTIS</hi></titlePart>
<lb/><lb/>
<titlePart type="sub"><hi rend='smallcaps; italic; font-size: large'>A Tale of the Departure of the
Romans from Britain</hi></titlePart>
</docTitle>
<lb/><lb/>
<byline>BY THE<lb/>
<docAuthor rend="font-size: large"><hi rend='smallcaps'>Rev.</hi> ALFRED J. CHURCH, M.A.</docAuthor>
<lb/><hi rend='italic'>Author of “Stories from Homer”</hi>
<lb/><lb/>WITH THE COLLABORATION OF
<lb/>RUTH PUTNAM<lb/>
</byline>
<lb/><lb/><lb/>
<titlePart><hi rend='italic'>Fifth Thousand</hi></titlePart>
<lb/><lb/><lb/>
<docImprint>
<pubPlace rend="font-size: large">London</pubPlace><lb/>
<publisher rend="font-size: large">SEELEY, SERVICE &amp; CO. LIMITED</publisher><lb/>
<pubPlace>38 <hi rend='smallcaps'>Great Russell Street</hi></pubPlace>
</docImprint>

</titlePage><div rend="page-break-before: always; text-align: center">
<pb/><anchor id='Pgii'/>

<p rend="small">
Entered at Stationers’ Hall<lb/>
By SEELEY &amp; CO.
</p>

<p rend="small"><hi rend='smallcaps'>Copyright by G. P. Putnam’s Sons</hi>, 1887<lb/>
(For the United States of America).</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pgiii'/>
<index index="toc" level1="Preface"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Preface"/>
<head>PREFACE.</head>

<p>
<q>Count of the Saxon Shore</q> was a title bestowed
by Maximian (colleague of Diocletian in the
Empire from 286 to 305 <hi rend='small'>A.D.</hi>) on the officer whose
task it was to protect the coasts of Britain and Gaul
from the attacks of the Saxon pirates. It appears
to have existed down to the abandonment of Britain
by the Romans.
</p>

<p>
So little is known from history about the last years
of the Roman occupation that the writer of fiction
has almost a free hand. In this story a novel, but,
it is hoped, not an improbable, view is taken of an
important event—the withdrawal of the legions.
This is commonly assigned to the year 410, when
the Emperor Honorius formally withdrew the
Imperial protection from Britain. But the usurper
Constantine had actually removed the British army
two years before; and, as he was busied with the
conquest of Gaul and Spain for a considerable time
after, it is not likely that they were ever sent back.
</p>

<signed rend="text-align: right">A. J. C.</signed>
<dateline rend="text-align: right">R. P.</dateline>

<pb/><anchor id='Pgiv'/>
</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pgv'/>
<index index="toc" level1="Contents"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Contents"/>
<head>CONTENTS.</head>

<pgIf output="pdf"><then><divGen type="toc"/></then>
<else>
<table rend="tblcolumns: 'r lw(38m) r'">
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><hi rend="small">CHAP.</hi></cell>
<cell></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><hi rend="small">PAGE</hi></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">I.</cell>
<cell>A BRITISH CÆSAR</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg001">1</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">II.</cell>
<cell>AN ELECTION</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg013">13</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">III.</cell>
<cell>A PRIZE</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg021">21</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">IV.</cell>
<cell>THE VILLA IN THE ISLAND</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg032">32</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">V.</cell>
<cell>CARNA</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg047">47</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">VI.</cell>
<cell>THE SAXON</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg057">57</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">VII.</cell>
<cell>A PRETENDER’S DIFFICULTIES</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg070">70</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">VIII.</cell>
<cell>THE NEWS IN THE CAMP</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg083">83</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">IX.</cell>
<cell>THE DEPARTURE OF THE LEGIONS</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg094">94</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">X.</cell>
<cell>DANGERS AHEAD</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg107">107</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XI.</cell>
<cell>THE PRIEST’S DEMAND</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg115">115</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XII.</cell>
<cell>LOST</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg124">124</ref></cell>
</row>
  <pb/><anchor id='Pgvi'/><row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XIII.</cell>
<cell>WHAT DOES IT MEAN?</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg135">135</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XIV.</cell>
<cell>THE PURSUIT</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg144">144</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XV.</cell>
<cell>THE PURSUIT (<hi rend='italic'>continued</hi>)</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg152">152</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XVI.</cell>
<cell>THE GREAT TEMPLE</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg164">164</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XVII.</cell>
<cell>THE BRITISH VILLAGE</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg173">173</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XVIII.</cell>
<cell>THE PICTS</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg182">182</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XIX.</cell>
<cell>THE SIEGE</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg194">194</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XX.</cell>
<cell>CEDRIC IN TROUBLE</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg207">207</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XXI.</cell>
<cell>THE ESCAPE</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg216">216</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XXII.</cell>
<cell>A VISITOR</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg224">224</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XXIII.</cell>
<cell>THE STRANGER’S STORY</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg234">234</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XXIV.</cell>
<cell>NEWS FROM ITALY</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg245">245</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XXV.</cell>
<cell>CONSULTATION</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg256">256</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XXVI.</cell>
<cell>FAREWELL!</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg266">266</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XXVII.</cell>
<cell>MARTIANUS</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg271">271</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XXVIII.</cell>
<cell>A RIVAL</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg281">281</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XXIX.</cell>
<cell>AN UNEXPECTED ARRIVAL</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg293">293</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XXX.</cell>
<cell>AT LAST</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg306">306</ref></cell>
</row>
</table>
</else>
</pgIf>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>
<index index="toc" level1="List of Illustrations"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="List of Illustrations"/>
<head>LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.</head>

<pgIf output="pdf"><then><divGen type="fig"/></then>
<else>
<table rend="tblcolumns: 'lw(45m) r'">
  <row>
<cell>THE BURNING OF THE VILLA</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="frontis"><hi rend='italic'>Frontispiece</hi></ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><hi rend="small">PAGE</hi></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell>CONSTANTINE ELECTED EMPEROR</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="fig018">18</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell>THE <hi rend='italic'>PANTHER</hi> AND THE SAXON PIRATES</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="fig028">28</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell>CEDRIC AT THE FORGE</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="fig058">58</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell>JAVELIN THROWING</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="fig078">78</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell>THE DEPARTURE OF THE LEGIONS</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="fig104">104</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell>BRITISH CONSPIRATORS </cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="fig112">112</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell>THE CAPTURE OF CARNA</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="fig128">128</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell>THE SACRIFICE</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="fig166">166</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell>CEDRIC AND THE PICT</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="fig196">196</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell>CEDRIC’S FURY</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="fig212">212</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell>CEDRIC’S ESCAPE</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="fig222">222</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell>CLAUDIAN’S TALE</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="fig234">234</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell>THE COUNT RECEIVING THE LETTER OF HONORIUS</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="fig252">252</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell>CARNA AND MARTIANUS</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="fig276">276</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell>CARNA ON THE HILLSIDE</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="fig304">304</ref></cell>
</row>
</table>
</else>
</pgIf>

<pb/><anchor id='Pgviii'/>
  
</div>  
</front>
<body rend="page-break-before: right">
  <pb n='1'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>
  
<p rend="text-align: center; font-size: xx-large; italic">THE COUNT OF THE SAXON SHORE.</p>
  <div type="chapter" n="1">
    <index index="toc" level1="I. A British Cæsar"/>
    <index index="pdf" level1="I. A British Caesar"/>

<head>CHAPTER I.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">A BRITISH CÆSAR.</hi></head>

<p>
  <q>Hail! Cæsar Emperor, the starving salute thee!</q><note place="foot">A reference to the well-known salutation of the gladiators
    as they passed the Emperor in his seat at the Public Games.
    <q>Ave Cæsar Imperator! Morituri te salutant.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Hail! Cæsar
      Emperor, the doomed to death salute thee.</hi></note>
and the speaker made a military salute to a silver
coin, evidently brand-new from the mint (which did
not seem, by the way, to turn out very good work),
and bearing the superscription, <q>Gratianus Cæsar
Imperator Felicissimus.</q> He was a soldier of middle
age, whose jovial face did not show any sign of the
fate which he professed to have so narrowly escaped,
and formed one of a group which was lounging about
the <foreign lang="la" rend='italic'>Quæstorium</foreign>, or, as we may put it, the paymaster’s
  office of the camp at the head of the Great Harbour.<note place="foot">Now known all over the world as Portsmouth Harbour.</note>
<pb n='2'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>A very curious medley of nationalities was that group.
There were Gauls; there were Germans from the
Rhine bank, some of them of the pure Teuton type,
with fair complexions, bright blue eyes, and reddish
golden hair, and remarkably tall of stature, others
showing an admixture of the Celtic blood of their
Gallic neighbours in their dark hair and hazel eyes;
there were swarthy Spaniards, fierce-looking men
from the Eastern Adriatic, showing some signs of
Greek parentage in their regular features and graceful
figures; there were two or three who seemed to
have an admixture of Asian or even African blood in
them; it might be said, in fact, there were representatives
of every province of the Empire, Italy only
excepted. They had been just receiving their pay,
long in arrear, and now considerably short of the
proper amount, and containing not a few coins which
the receivers seemed to think of doubtful value.
</p>

<p>
<q>Let me look at his Imperial Majesty,</q> said
another speaker; and he scanned the features of the
new Cæsar—features never very dignified, and certainly
not flattered by the rude coinage—with something
like contempt. <q>Well, he does not look
exactly as a Cæsar should; but what does it matter?
This will go down with Rufus at the wine-shop and
Priscus the sausage-seller, as well as the head of the
great Augustus himself.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah!</q> said a third speaker, picking out from
<pb n='3'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>a handful of silver a coin which bore the head of
Theodosius, <q>this was an Emperor worth fighting
under. I made my first campaign with him against
Maximus, another British Cæsar, by the way; and
he was every inch a soldier. If his son were like
him<note place="foot">Honorius and Arcadius, who ruled over the Western and
  Eastern Empires respectively, were the weak sons of the
  vigorous Theodosius.</note> things would be smoother than they are.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you think,</q> said the second speaker, after
first throwing a cautious glance to see whether any
officer of rank was in hearing—<q>do you think we
have made a change for the better from Marcus?<note place="foot">Marcus was the first of three usurpers successively saluted
  Emperor by the legions of Britain.</note>
He at all events used to be more liberal with his
money than his present majesty. You remember he
gave us ten silver pieces each. Now we don’t even
get our proper pay.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Marcus, my dear fellow,</q> said the other speaker,
<q>had a full military chest to draw upon, and it was
not difficult to be generous. Gratianus has to squeeze
every denarius out of the citizens. I heard them
say, when the money came into the camp yesterday,
that it was a loan from the Londinium merchants.
I wonder what interest they will get, and when they
will see the principal again.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Hang the fat rascals!</q> said the other. <q>Why
<pb n='4'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>should they sleep soft, and eat and drink the best of
everything, while we poor soldiers, who keep them
and their money-bags safe, have to go bare and
hungry?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Come, come, comrades,</q> interrupted the first
soldier who had spoken; <q>no more grumbling, or
some of us will find the centurion after us with his
vine-sticks.</q>
</p>

<p>
The group broke up, most of them making the
best of their way to spend some of their unaccustomed
riches at the wine-shop, a place from which they had
lately kept an enforced absence. Three or four of
the number, however, who seemed, from a sign that
passed between them, to have some secret understanding,
remained in close conversation—a conversation
which they carried on in undertones, and
which they adjourned to one of the tents to finish
without risk of being disturbed or overheard.
</p>

<p>
The camp in which our story opens was a
square enclosure, measuring some five hundred
yards each way, and surrounded by a massive
wall, not less than four feet in thickness, in
the construction of which stone, brick, and tile
had, in Roman fashion, been used together.
The defences were completed by strong towers
of a rounded shape, which had been erected at
frequent intervals. The camp had, as usual, its
four gates. That which opened upon the sea—for
<pb n='5'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>the sea washed the southern front—was famous in
military tradition as the gate by which the second
legion had embarked to take part in the Jewish War
and the famous siege of Jerusalem. Vespasian,
who had begun in Britain the great career which
ended in the throne, had experienced its valour
and discipline in more than one campaign,<note place="foot">Vespasian, appointed by Claudius in <hi rend='small'>A.D.</hi> 52 to the command
  of the second legion, had made extensive conquests in Britain
  adding, among other places, the Isle of Wight (Vectis) to the
  Empire.</note> and had
paid it the high compliment of making a special
request for its services when he was appointed to
conduct what threatened to be a formidable war.
This glorious recollection was proudly cherished in
the camp, though more than three centuries had
passed, changing as they went the aspect of the
camp, till it looked at least as much like a town as
a military post. The troops were housed in huts
stoutly built of timber, which a visitor would have
found comfortably furnished by a long succession of
occupants. The quarters of the tribune and higher
centurions were commodious dwellings of brick; and
the headquarters of the legate, or commanding
officer, with its handsome chambers, its baths, and
tesselated pavements, might well have been a mansion
at Rome. There was a street of regular shape, in
which provisions, clothes, and even ornaments could
<pb n='6'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>be bought. Roman discipline, though somewhat
relaxed, did not indeed permit the dealers to remain
within the fortifications at night, but the shops were
tenanted by day, and did a thriving business, not
only with the soldiers, but with the Britons of the
neighbourhood, who found the camp a convenient
resort, where they could market to advantage, besides
gossiping to their hearts’ content. The relations
between the soldiers and their native neighbours
were indeed friendly in the extreme. The legion had
had its headquarters in the camp of the Great
Harbour for many generations, though it had occasionally
gone on foreign service. Lately, too, the
policy which had recruited the British legion with
soldiers from the Continent, had been relaxed, partly
from carelessness, partly because it was necessary to
fill up the ranks as could best be done, and there was
but little choice of men. Thus service became very
much an inheritance. The soldiers married British
women, and their children, growing up, became
soldiers in turn. Many recruits still came from Gaul,
Spain, and the mouth of the Rhine, and elsewhere,
but quite as many of the troops were by this time,
in part or in whole, British.
</p>

<p>
Another change which the three centuries and a
half since Vespasian’s time had brought about was in
religion. The temple of Mars, which had stood near
the headquarters, and where the legate had been
<pb n='7'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>accustomed to take the auspices,<note place="foot">The observation of omens, or signs, supposed to indicate the
future, was one of the duties of a commanding officer.</note> was now a Christian
Church, duly served by a priest of British birth.
</p>

<p>
About a couple of hours later in the day a shout of
<q>The Emperor! the Emperor!</q> was raised in the
camp, and the soldiers, flocking out from the mess-tents
in which most of them were sitting, lined in a
dense throng the avenue which led from the chief
gate to headquarters.
</p>

<p>
Gratianus, who was followed by a few officers of
superior rank and a small escort of cavalry, rode
slowly between the lines of soldiers. His reception
was not as hearty as he had expected to find. He
had, as the soldiers had hinted, made vast exertions to
raise a sum of money in Londinium—then, as now,
the wealthiest municipality in the island. Himself a
native of the place, and connected with some of its
richest citizens, he had probably got together more
than any one else would have done in like circumstances.
But all his persuasions and promises, even
his offer of twenty per cent. interest, had not been
able to extract from the Londinium burghers the full
sum that was required; and the soldiers, who the
day before would have loudly proclaimed that they
would be thankful for the smallest instalment, were
now almost furious because they had not been paid
in full. A few shouts of <q>Hail, Cæsar! Hail,
<pb n='8'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>Gratianus! Hail, Britannicus!</q> greeted him on the
road to his quarters; but these came from the front
lines only, and chiefly from the centurions and
deputy-centurions, while the great body of the
soldiers maintained an ominous silence, sometimes
broken by a sullen murmur.
</p>

<p>
Gratianus was not a man fitted to deal with sudden
emergencies. He was rash and he was ambitious,
but he wanted steadfast courage, and he was
hampered by scruples of which an usurper must
rid himself at once if he hopes to keep himself safe
in his seat. He might have appealed frankly to the
soldiers—asked them what it was they complained
of, and taken them frankly into his confidence; or
he might have overawed them by an example of
severity, fixing on some single act of insubordination
or insolence, and sending the offender to instant
execution. He was not bold enough for either
course, and the opportunity passed, as quickly as
opportunities do in such times, hopelessly out of his
reach.
</p>

<p>
The temper of the soldiers grew more excited and
dangerous as the day went on. For many weeks
past want of money had kept them sober against
their will, and now that the long-expected pay-day
had come they crowded the wine-shops inside and
outside the camp, and drank almost as wildly as an
Australian shepherd when he comes down to the town
<pb n='9'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>after a six months’ solitude. As anything can set
highly combustible materials on fire, so the most
trivial and meaningless incident will turn a tipsy
mob into a crowd of bloodthirsty madmen. Just
before sunset a messenger entered the camp bringing
a despatch from one of the outlying forts. One of
those prodigious lies which seem always ready to
start into existence when they are wanted for mischief
at once ran like wild-fire through the camp.
Gratianus was bringing together troops from other
parts of the province, and was going to disarm and
decimate the garrison of the Great Camp. The unfortunate
messenger was seized before he could make
his way to headquarters, seriously injured, and
robbed of the despatch which he was carrying. Some
of the centurions ventured to interfere and endeavour
to put down the tumult. Two or three who were
popular with the men were good-humouredly disarmed;
others, who were thought too rigorous in
discipline, were roughly handled and thrown into
the military prison; one, who had earned for himself
the nick-name of <q>Old Hand me the other,</q><note place="foot">When one of the vine-sticks used in administering corporal
punishment to the Roman soldiers was broken on the culprit’s
back, he would at once call for another. A milder disciplinarian
would probably consider that when the stick was broken the
punishment might end.</note> was
killed on the spot. The furious crowd then rushed
to headquarters, where Gratianus was entertaining
<pb n='10'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>a company of officers of high rank, and clamoured
that they must see the Emperor. He came out and
mounted the hustings, which stood near the front of
the buildings, and from which it was usual to address
gatherings of the soldiers.
</p>

<p>
For a moment the men, not altogether lost to the
sense of discipline, were hushed into silence and
order by the sight of the Emperor as he stood on the
platform in his Imperial purple, his figure thrown
into bold relief by the torches which his attendants
held behind him.
</p>

<p>
<q>What do you want, my children?</q> he said; but
there was a tremble in his voice which put fresh
courage into the failing hearts of the mutineers.
</p>

<p>
<q>Give us our pay, give us our arrears!</q> answered
a soldier in one of the back rows, emboldened to
speak by finding himself out of sight.
</p>

<p>
The cry was taken up by the whole multitude.
<q>Our pay! Our pay!</q> was shouted from thousands
of throats.
</p>

<p>
Gratianus stood perplexed and irresolute, visibly
cowering before the storm. At this moment one of
the tribunes stepped forward and whispered in his
ear. What he said was this: <q>Say to them, <q>Follow
me, and I will give you all you ask and more.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
It was a happy suggestion, one of the vague promises
that commit to nothing, and if the unlucky usurper
could have given it with confidence, with an air that
<pb n='11'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>gave it a meaning, he might have been saved, at least
for a time. But his nerve, his presence of mind was
hopelessly lost. <q>Follow me—where? Whither am
I to lead them?</q> he asked, in a hurried, agitated
whisper.
</p>

<p>
His adviser shrugged his shoulders and was silent.
He saw that he was not comprehended.
</p>

<p>
Gratianus continued to stand silent and irresolute,
with his helpless, despairing gaze fixed upon the
crowd. Then came a great surging movement from
the back of the crowd, and the front ranks were
almost forced up the steps of the platform. The
unlucky prince turned as if to flee. The movement
sealed his fate. A stone hurled from the back of the
crowd struck him on the side of the face. Half
stunned by the blow, he leaned against one of the
attendants, and the blood could be seen pouring
down his face, pale with terror, and looking ghastly
in the flaming torchlight. The next moment the
attendant flung down his torch and fled—an example
followed by all his companions. Then all was in
darkness; and it only wanted darkness to make a
score of hands busy in the deed of blood.
</p>

<p>
As Gratianus lay prostrate on the ground the first
blow was aimed by a brother of his predecessor,
Marcus, who had been quietly waiting for an opportunity
of vengeance. In another minute he had
ceased to live. His head was severed from the body
<pb n='12'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>and fixed on the top of a pike. One of the murderers
seized a smouldering torch, and, blowing it into
flame, held it up while another exhibited the bleeding
head, and cried, <q>The tyrant has his deserts!</q> But
by this time the mad rage of the crowd had subsided.
The horror of the deed had sobered them. Many
began to remember little acts of kindness which the
murdered man had done them, and the feeling of
wrong was lost in a revulsion of pity. In a few
moments more the crowd was scattered. Silent and
remorseful the men went to their quarters, and
the camp was quiet again. But another British
Cæsar had gone the way of a long line of unlucky
predecessors.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="2" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='13'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
<index index="toc" level1="II. An Election"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="II. An Election"/>
<head>CHAPTER II.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">AN ELECTION.</hi></head>

<p>
The camp next day was covered with gloom. The
soldiers moved silent and with downcast faces along
the avenues, or discharged in a mechanical way their
routine duties. The guards were turned out, the
sentries relieved, and the general order of service
maintained without any action on the part of
the officers—at least of those who held superior
rank. These remained in the seclusion of their
tents; and it may be said that those who were
conscious of being popular were almost as much
alarmed as those who knew that they were disliked.
If the latter dreaded the vengeance of those whom
they had offended, the others were scarcely less
alarmed by the possibility of being elected to the
perilous dignity which had just proved fatal to
Gratianus. The country people, whose presence
generally gave an air of cheerfulness and activity
to the camp, were too much alarmed to come. The
<pb n='14'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>trading booths inside the gates were empty, and only
a very few stalls were occupied in the market, which
was held every day outside them.
</p>

<p>
The funeral of the late prince was celebrated with
some pomp. The soldiers attended it in crowds, and
manifested their grief, and, it would seem, their
remorse, by groans and tears. They were ready
even to give proofs of their repentance by the summary
execution of those who had taken an active part
in the bloody deed. But here, one of the centurions,
whose cheerful, genial manners made him an unfailing
favourite with the men, had the courage
to check them. <q>No, my men,</q> said he; <q>we
were all mad last night, and we must all take the
blame.</q>
</p>

<p>
Two days passed without any incident of importance.
On the third the question of a successor began
to be discussed. One of the other garrisons might
be beforehand with them, and they would have either
to accept a chief who would owe his best favours to
others, or risk their lives in an unprofitable struggle
with him. In the afternoon a general assembly of
the troops was held, the officers still holding aloof,
though some of them mixed, <foreign lang="it" rend='italic'>incognito</foreign>, so to speak, in
the crowd.
</p>

<p>
Of course, the first difficulty was to find any one
who would take the lead. At last the genial centurion,
who has been mentioned above as a well-<pb n='15'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>established favourite with the soldiers, was pushed
to the front. His speech was short and sensible.
<q>Comrades,</q> he said, <q>I doubt whether what I have
to say will please you; but I shall say it all the
same. You know that I always speak my mind. We
have not done very well in the new ways. Let us
try the old. I propose that we take the oath to
Honorius Augustus.</q>
</p>

<p>
A deep murmur of discontent ran through the
assembly, and showed that the speaker had presumed
at least as far as was safe on his popularity
with the troops.
</p>

<p>
<q>Does Decius,</q> cried a burly German from the
crowd—Decius was the name of the centurion—<q>does
Decius recommend that we should trust to the
mercy of Honorius? Very good, perhaps, for himself;
for the giver of such advice could scarcely fail
of a reward; but for us it means decimation<note place="foot"><q>Decimation</q> was a common military punishment in cases
of mutiny or bad behaviour on the field of battle. Every tenth
man, taken by lot, was put to death.</note> at the
least.</q>
</p>

<p>
A shout of applause showed that the speaker had
expressed the feelings of his audience.
</p>

<p>
<q>I propose that we all take the oath to Decius
himself!</q> said a Batavian; <q>he is a brave man and
an honest, and what do we want more?</q>
</p>

<p>
The good Decius had heard undismayed the angry
<pb n='16'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>disapproval which his loyal proposal had called
forth; but the mention of his name as a possible
candidate for the throne overwhelmed him with
terror. His jovial face grew pale as death; the
sweat stood in large drops upon his forehead; he
trembled as he had never trembled in the face of an
enemy.
</p>

<p>
<q>Comrades,</q> he stammered, <q>what have I done
that you should treat me thus? If I have offended
or injured you, kill me, but not this.</q>
</p>

<p>
More than half possessed by a spirit of mischief,
the assembly answered this piteous appeal by continuous
shouts of <q>Long live the Emperor Decius!</q>
</p>

<p>
The good man grew desperate. He drew his
sword from the scabbard, and pointed it at his own
heart. <q>At least,</q> he cried, <q>you can’t forbid me
this escape.</q>
</p>

<p>
The bystanders wrested the weapon from him;
but the joke had gone far enough, and the man was
too genuinely popular for the soldiers to allow him to
be tormented beyond endurance. A voice from the
crowd shouted, <q>Long live the Centurion Decius!</q>
to which another answered, <q>Long live Decius the
subject!</q> and the worthy man felt that the danger
was over.
</p>

<p>
A number of candidates, most of whom were probably
as little desirous of the honour as Decius, were
now proposed in succession.
</p>

<pb n='17'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>

<p>
<q>I name the Tribune Manilius,</q> said one of the
soldiers.
</p>

<p>
The name was received with a shout of laughter.
</p>

<p>
<q>Let him learn first to be Emperor at home!</q> cried
a voice from the back of the assembly, a sally which
had considerable success, as his wife was a well-known
termagant, and his two sons the most frequent
inmates of the military prison.
</p>

<p>
<q>I name the Centurion Pisinna.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Very good, if he does not pledge the purple,</q> for
Pisinna was notoriously impecunious.
</p>

<p>
<q>I name the Tribune Cetronius.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Very good as Emperor of the baggage-guard.</q>
Cetronius had, to say the least, no high reputation
for personal courage, and was supposed to prefer the
least exposed parts on the field.
</p>

<p>
A number of other names were mentioned only to
be dismissed with more or less contumely. Tired of
this sport—for it really was nothing more—the crowd
cried out for a speech from a well-known orator of
the camp, whose fluency, not unmixed with shrewdness
and humour, had gained him a considerable
reputation among his comrades.
</p>

<p>
<q>Comrades,</q> he began, <q>if you have not yet found
a candidate worthy of your suffrages, it is not because
such do not exist among you. Can it be believed that
Britain is less worthy to produce the Emperor than
Gaul, or Spain, or Thrace, or even the effeminate
<pb n='18'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>Syria? Was it not from Britain that there came forth
the greatest of the successors of Augustus, the Second
Romulus, Flavius Aurelius Constantinus?</q><note place="foot">It would seem that the myth which made the Empress
Helena, the mother of Constantine, into a British princess, had
already grown up. She was, in fact, the daughter of a tavern-keeper,
and in no way connected with Britain.</note>
</p>

<p>
The orator was not permitted to proceed any
further. The name Constantinus ran like an electric
shock through the whole assembly, and a thousand
voices took up the cry, <q>Long live Constantinus,
Emperor Augustus!</q> while all eyes were turned to
one of the back rows of the meeting, where a soldier
who happened to bear that name was standing.
Some of his comrades caught him by the arm, hurried
him to the front, and from thence on to the
hustings. He was greeted with a perfect uproar of
applause, partly, of course, ironical, but partly the
expression of a genuine feeling that the right man
had been found, and found by some sort of Divine
assistance. The soldiers were, as has been said, a
strange medley of men, scarcely able to understand
each other, and alike only in being savage, ignorant,
and superstitious. They had been unlucky in choosing
for themselves, and now it might be well to have
the choice made for them. And at least the new man
had a name which all of them knew and reverenced,
as far as they reverenced anything.
</p>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: Constantine elected Emperor.]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><anchor id="fig018"/><figure url="images/i_029.jpg" rend="w100"><index index="fig" level1="Constantine elected Emperor"/>
<head><hi rend='smallcaps'>Constantine elected Emperor.</hi></head>
<figDesc>Constantine elected Emperor</figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<pb n='19'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
<p>
Whether he had anything but a name might have
seemed perhaps somewhat doubtful. He had reached
middle age, for he had two sons already grown up,
but had never risen above the rank of a private soldier.
It might be said, perhaps, that he had shown
some ability in thus avoiding promotion—not always
a desirable thing in troublous times; but there was
the fact that he was nearly fifty years of age, and was
not even a deputy-centurion. On the other hand, he
was a respectable man, ignorant indeed, for, like most
of his comrades, he could neither read nor write, but
with a certain practical shrewdness, so good-humoured
that he had never made an enemy, known
to be remarkably brave, a great athlete in his youth,
and still of a strength beyond the average.
</p>

<p>
His sudden and strange elevation did not seem to
throw him in the least off his balance. He had been
perfectly content to go without promotion, and now
he seemed equally content to receive the highest promotion
of all. He stood calmly facing the excited
mob, as unmoved as if he had been a private soldier
on the parade ground. A slight flush, indeed, might
have been seen <anchor id="corr019"/><corr sic="tomount">to mount</corr> to his face when the cloak
of imperial purple was thrown over his shoulders,
and the peaked diadem put upon his head. He must
have been less than man not to have felt some thrill
either of fear or pride at the touch of what had brought
two of his comrades to their graves within the space
<pb n='20'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>of less than half a year; but he showed no other
sign of emotion.
</p>

<p>
The officers, seeing the turn things had taken, had
now come to the front, and the senior tribune, taking
the new Emperor by the hand, led him to the edge of
the hustings, and said, <q>Comrades, I present to you
Aurelius Constantinus, chosen by the providence of
God and the choice of the army to be Emperor of
Britain and the West. The Blessed and Undivided
Trinity order it for the best.</q> A ringing shout of
approval went up in response. The tribunes then
took the oath of allegiance to the new Emperor in
person. These again administered it to the centurions,
and the centurions swore in great batches of
the soldiers. The new-made prince meanwhile stood
unmoved, it might almost be said insensible, so
strange was his composure in the face of his sudden
elevation. All that he said—the result, it seemed, of
a whisper from one of his sons—were a few words,
which, however, had all the success of a most eloquent
oration.
</p>

<p>
<q>Comrades, I promise you a donative<note place="foot">A <foreign lang="la" rend='italic'>donative</foreign> was a distribution of money made to the soldiers
on such occasions as the accession of an Emperor.</note> within the
space of a month.</q>
</p>

<p>
The assembly broke up in great good-humour, and
the newly-made Emperor, attended by the officers,
went to take possession of headquarters.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="3" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='21'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
<index index="toc" level1="III. A Prize"/><index index="pdf" level1="III. A Prize"/>
<head>CHAPTER III.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">A PRIZE.</hi></head>

<p>
It was a bright morning some three weeks after the
occurrences related in the last chapter, when a
squadron of four Roman galleys swept round the
point which is now known as the South Foreland.
The leader of the four, all of which, indeed, lay so
close together as to be within easy hailing distance,
bore on its mainmast the <foreign lang="la" rend='italic'>Labarum</foreign>, or Imperial
standard, showing on a ground of purple a cross, a
crown, and the sacred initials, all wrought in gold.
It was the flagship, so to speak, of the great Count
himself, one of the most important lieutenants of the
Empire, whose task it was to guard the shores of
Britain and Northern Gaul from the pirate swarms
that issued from the harbours of the North Sea and
the Baltic. The Count himself was on board, coming
south from his villa on the eastern shore—for the
stations of which he had the charge extended as far
as the Wash—to his winter residence in the sunny
island of Vectis.
</p>

<pb n='22'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>

<p>
The Count was a tall man of middle age, and wore
over his tunic a military cloak reaching to the hips,
and clasped at the neck with a handsome device in
gold, representing a hunting-dog with his teeth fixed
in a stag. His head was covered with a broad-brimmed
hat of felt. The only weapon that he
carried was a short sword, which, with its plain hilt
and leather scabbard, was evidently meant for use
rather than show. His whole appearance and bearing,
indeed, were those of a man of action and energy.
His eyes were bright and piercing; his nose showed,
strongly pronounced, the curve which has always
been associated with the ability to command; the
contour of his chin and lips, as far as could be seen
through a short curling beard and moustache, worn
as a prudent defence against the climate, betokened
firmness. Still, the expression of the face was not
unkindly. As a great writer says of one whom
Britain had had good reason in earlier days both to
fear and to love, <q>one would easily believe him to
be a good man, and willingly believe him to be great.</q>
</p>

<p>
At the time when our story opens he was standing
in conversation with the helmsman, a weather-beaten
old sailor, whose dark Southern complexion had been
deepened by the sun and winds of more than fifty
years of service into an almost African hue.
</p>

<p>
<q>The wind will hardly serve us as well as it has,</q>
said the Count, as his practised eye, familiar with
<pb n='23'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>every yard of the coast, perceived that they were
well abreast of the extreme southern point of the
coast.
</p>

<p>
<q>No, my lord,</q> said the old man, <q>we shall have
to take as long a tack as we can to the south. There
is a deal of west in the wind—more, I think, than there
was an hour since. Castor and Pollux—I beg your
lordship’s pardon, the blessed Saints—defend us from
anything like a westerly gale.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah! old croaker,</q> replied the Count, with a
laugh, <q>I verily believe that you will be half disappointed
if we get to our journey’s end without some
<anchor id="corr023"/><corr sic="(quote mark missing)">mishap.</corr></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Good words, good words, my lord,</q> said the old
man, hastily crossing himself, while he muttered
something, which, if it could have been overheard,
would have been scarcely suitable to that act of
devotion. <q rend="post: none">Heaven bring us safe to our journey’s
end! Of course it is your lordship’s business to give
orders, and ours to go to the bottom, if it is to be so.
But I must say, saving your presence, that it is
against all rules of a sailor’s craft as I have known
it, man and boy, for nigh upon threescore years, to
be at sea near about a month after the autumn
equinox.</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l>’Never let your keel be wet,</l>
<l>When the Pleiades have set;</l>
<l>Never let your keel be dry,</l>
<l>When the Crown is in the sky.’</l>
</lg>

<pb n='24'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>

<p>
<q rend="pre: none">That is what my father used to say, and his fathers
before him, for I do not know how many generations,
for we have always followed the sea.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well for them, perhaps,</q> said the Count,
<q>in the days when a man would almost as soon go
into a lion’s den as venture out of sight of land.
But the world is too busy to let us waste half our
year on shore.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, yes, I know all about that,</q> answered the
old man, who was privileged to have the last word
even with so great a personage as the Count; <q>but
there is a proverb, <q>Much haste, little speed,</q> and I
have always found it quite as true by sea as by
land.</q>
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the proper signals had been given to
the rest of the squadron, and the whole four were
now heading south, with a point or two to the west,
the <name type="ship">Panther</name>—for that was the name of the flagship—still
slightly leading the way, with her consorts in
close company. In this order they made about twelve
miles, the wind freshening somewhat as they drew
further away from the British shore, and, being nearly
aft, carrying them briskly along.
</p>

<p>
<q>Fine sailing, fine sailing,</q> said the old helmsman,
drawn almost in spite of himself into an exclamation
of delight, as the <name type="ship">Panther</name>, rushing through
the water with an almost even keel, began to widen
the gap between herself and her nearest follower.
<pb n='25'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>The short waves, which just broke in sparkling foam,
the brilliant sunshine, almost bringing back summer
with its noonday heat, and the sea with a blue which
recalled, though but faintly, the deep tint of his
native Mediterranean, combined to gladden the old
man’s soul. <q>But we need not put about now,</q> he
said to himself. <q>If this wind holds we shall fetch
Lemanis<note place="foot">Lymne, in Kent, now some miles inward, on the edge of
Romney Marsh.</note> without requiring to tack.</q>
</p>

<p>
He was about to give the necessary orders to trim
the sails, when he was stopped by a shout from the
look-out man at the bow, <q>A sail on the starboard
side!</q> Just within the range of a keen sight, in the
south-western horizon, the sunlight fell on what was
evidently a sail. But the distance was too great to
let even the keenest sight distinguish what kind of
craft it might be, or which way it was moving. The
Count, who had gone below for his mid-day meal,
was of course informed of the news. He came at
once upon deck, and lost no time in making up his
mind.
</p>

<p>
<q>If she is an enemy,</q> he said to the old helmsman,
<q>she will be eastward bound; though I never
knew a pirate keep the sea quite so late in the year.
If she is a friend she will probably be sailing westward,
or even coming our way—but it does not
matter which. If she has anything to tell us, we
<pb n='26'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>shall be sure to hear it sooner or later. But it will
never do to let a pirate escape if we can help it.
Any one who is out so late as the middle of October
must have had good reason for stopping, and can
hardly fail to be worth catching. Quintus, put her
right before the wind, and clap on every inch of
canvas.</q>
</p>

<p>
The course of the squadron was now changed to
nearly due south-east. All eyes, of course, were
bent on the strange craft, and before an hour had
passed it was evident that the Count had been right
in his guess. There were four ships; they were long
and low in the water, of the build which was only
too well known along the coasts of Gaul and Britain,
where no river or creek, if it gave as much as three or
four feet of water, was safe from their attack. In short,
they were Saxon pirates, and were now moving eastward
with all the speed that sails and oars could give
them. The question that every one on board the
<name type="ship">Panther</name> was putting to himself with intense interest
was, <q>Shall we be able to intercept them?</q> For
the present the Count’s ship had the advantage of
speed, thanks to the wind abaft the beam. But a
stern chase would be useless. On equal terms the
pirates were at least as quick as their pursuers.
The light, too, of the autumn day would soon fail,
and with the light every chance of success would
be gone.
</p>

<pb n='27'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>

<p>
For a time it seemed as if the escape of the pirate
was certain. <q>Curse the scoundrels!</q> cried the
Count, as he paced impatiently up and down the
after deck. <q>If it would only come on to blow in
real earnest we should have them. Anyhow, I
would sooner that we should all founder together
than that they should get off scot free.</q>
</p>

<p>
The <name type="ship">Panther</name>, which had left her consorts about a
mile in the rear, was now near enough for her crew
to see distinctly the outlines of the pirate ships, to
mark the glitter of the shields that were ranged
along the gunwales, and to catch the rhythmic rise
and fall of the long sweeping oars. The Saxons
were evidently straining every nerve to make good
their escape, and it seemed scarcely possible that
they could fail. Then came a turn of fortune—the
very thing, in fact, that the Count had prayed for.
For a time—only a very few moments—the wind
freshened to something like the force of a gale. The
masts of the <name type="ship">Panther</name> were strained to the utmost of
their strength; they groaned and bent like whips
under the sudden pressure on the canvas, but the
seasoned timber stood the sudden call upon it
bravely. How the Count blessed himself that he
had never passed over a piece of bad workmanship
or bad material! The good ship took a wild plunge
forward, but nothing gave way. But the last of the
four pirates was not so fortunate. She had one tall
<pb n='28'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>mast, carrying a fore-and-aft sail, so large as to be
quite out of proportion to her size. The wind
struck her nearly sideways, and she heeled over till
her keel could almost be seen. For a moment it
was doubtful whether she would not capsize. Then
the mast gave. The vessel righted at once, but only
to lie utterly helpless on the water, with all her
starboard oars hopelessly entangled with the canvas
and rigging. What the Count would have done had
his ship been entirely in hand it is difficult to say.
No speedier or more effective way of dealing with
the enemy than running her down could have been
practised. The <name type="ship">Panther</name> had three or four times the
tonnage of her adversary, whose lightness and low
bulwarks made her easily accessible to this kind of
attack. Nor would the pirates have a chance of
showing the desperate valour which the Roman
boarding-parties had learnt to respect and almost to
fear. The only argument on the other side would
have been that prisoners and booty would probably
be lost. But, as a matter of fact, the Count had no
opportunity of weighing the <hi rend='italic'>pros</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>cons</hi> in the
matter. The <name type="ship">Panther</name>, driving as she was straight
before the wind, was practically unmanageable. She
struck the pirate craft with a tremendous crash
amidships, and cut her almost literally in half. One
blow, and one only, did the pirates strike at their
conquerors. When escape had become manifestly
<pb n='29'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>impossible by the fall of the mast, the Saxon warriors
had dropped their oars, and seizing their bows had
discharged a volley of arrows against the Roman
ship. The hurry and confusion of the moment did
not favour accurate aim, and most of the missiles
flew wide of the mark; but one seemed to have been
destined to fulfil the helmsman’s expectations of evil
to come. It struck the old man on the left side,
inflicting a fatal wound. In the first confusion of the
shock the incident was not noticed, for the brave
fellow stuck gallantly to the tiller, propping himself
up against it while he kept the <name type="ship">Panther</name> steadily
before the wind. In fact, loss of blood had brought
him nearly to his end before it was even known that
he had been wounded. Then, in a moment, the
Count was at his side.
</p>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: The Panther and the Saxon Pirate.]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><anchor id="fig028"/><figure url="images/i_041.jpg" rend="w100"><index index="fig" level1="The Panther and the Saxon Pirate"/>
<head><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Panther and the Saxon Pirate.</hi></head>
<figDesc>The Panther and the Saxon Pirate</figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<p>
<q>Carry him to my own cabin,</q> he said.
</p>

<p>
The old man raised his hand in a gesture that
seemed to refuse the service which half a dozen stout
sailors were at once ready to render him. <q>Nay,</q>
said he, <q>it is idle; this arrow has sped me. But
let me die here, where I can see the waves and the
sky. I have known them, man and boy, threescore
years—aye, and more, for my father would take me on
his ship when I was a tiny chap of three feet high.
Nay, no cabin for me; ’tis almost as bad as dying
in one’s bed.</q>
</p>

<p>
His voice grew feeble. The Count stopped, and
<pb n='30'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>asked whether there was anything that he could do
for him.
</p>

<p>
<q>Nay,</q> said the old man, <q>nothing; I have
neither chick nor child. ’Tis all as well as I could
have wished. But mark, my lord, I was right about
sailing in October. Any one that knows the sea
would be sure that trouble must come of it.</q>
</p>

<p>
The next moment he was past speaking or hearing.
</p>

<p>
It was his privilege, we must remember, to have
the last word.
</p>

<p>
The <name type="ship">Panther</name> meanwhile had been brought to the
wind. Her consorts, too, had come up, and a search
was made for any survivors of the encounter that
might be still afloat. Some had been killed outright
by the concussion; others had been so hurt that they
could make no effort to save themselves. They
would not, however, have made it if they could.
Those that had escaped uninjured evidently preferred
drowning to a Roman prison. With grim resolution
they straightened their arms to their sides and went
down. Only two survivors were picked up. These,
evidently twins from their close resemblance to each
other, were found clinging to a fragment of timber.
One had been grievously hurt, the other had not
suffered any injury.
</p>

<p>
The wounded man, who had received an almost
fatal blow upon the head, had lost the power to
move, and was holding on to life more than half
un<pb n='31'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>consciously; and his brother, moved by that passionate
love so often found between twins, had
sacrificed himself—that is, the honour which he
counted dearer than life—to save him. Had he had
only himself to think of, he would have been the first
to go down a free man to the bottom of the sea; but
his brother was almost helpless, and he could not
leave him.
</p>

<p>
When it was evident that all further search would
be useless, the squadron set their sails for Lemanis,
which, thanks to a further change in the wind to the
northward, they were able to reach before midnight.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="4" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='32'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
<index index="toc" level1="IV. The Villa in the Island"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="IV. The Villa in the Island"/>
<head>CHAPTER IV.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">THE VILLA IN THE ISLAND.</hi></head>

<p>
Count Ælius was a man of the best Roman type,
a man of <q>primitive virtue,</q> as the classical writers
would have put it, though this virtue had been
softened, refined, and purified by civilizing and instructing
influences, of which the old Roman heroes—the
Fabiuses, the Catos, the Scipios—had known
nothing. In the antiquity of his lineage there was
scarcely a man in the Empire who could pretend
to compare with him. For the most part, the old
houses from which had come the Consuls and Dictators
of the Republic had died out. The old nobility
had gone, and the new nobility had followed it.
The great name of Fabius, saved by an accident from
extinction, when its three hundred gallant sons,
each of them <q>fit to command an army,</q> perished
in one day by the craft of the Etruscan foe, had
passed away. There was no living representative
of the conqueror of Carthage, or of the conqueror
<pb n='33'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>of Corinth. Even the <foreign lang="fr" rend='italic'>parvenus</foreign> of the Empire had in
their turn disappeared. The generals and senators,
both of the old Rome and of the new,<note place="foot">Constantinople.</note> bore
names which would have sounded strange and
barbarous to Cicero or even to Tacitus. An Ælius
then, one who claimed to trace his descent to a time
even earlier than the legendary age, to a race which
was domiciled in Italy long before even Æneas had
brought thither the gods of Troy, was an almost
singular phenomenon in a generation of new men.
And nothing less than this was the pedigree claimed
by the Ælii. Their remotest ancestor—the Count
never could hear an allusion to it without a smile—was
the famous cannibal king who ruled over the
<anchor id="corr033"/><corr sic="Lasetrygones">Laestrygones</corr>, a tribe of Western Italy,<note place="foot">His capital is said to have been near the ancient Caieta and
modern Gaieta.</note> and from
whose jaws the prudent Ulysses so narrowly escaped.
The pride of ancient descent is not particular as
to the character of a progenitor, so he be sufficiently
remote; and one branch of the Ælii had
always delighted to recall by their surname their
connection with this man-eating hero. But the race
had not lacked glories of its own in historical times.
They had had soldiers, statesmen, and men of letters
among them. One of them had been made immortal
by the friendship of Horace. Another, an adopted
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>son, it was true, better known by the famous name
of Sejanus, had nearly made himself master of the
throne of the Cæsars. About a hundred years later
this crowning glory of human ambition had fallen to
it in the person of Hadrian, third in the list of the
<q>five good Emperors</q>;<note place="foot">The <q>five</q> are, Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus Pius,
and Marcus Aurelius, whose united reigns extended from 97 to
180 <hi rend='small'>A.D.</hi>—a period of peace and prosperity such as Rome never
enjoyed again.</note> though indeed there were
purists in the matter of genealogy who stoutly denied
that this great soldier and scholar had any of the real
Ælian blood in him.
</p>

<p>
The Count’s father had held civil office at Carthage,
and the young Ælius had there, for a short time,
been a pupil of Aurelius Augustinus, then known
as an eloquent teacher of rhetoric, afterwards to
become the most famous doctor of the Western
Church. But his bent was not for the profession
of the law, and his father, though disappointed at his
preference for a soldier’s career, would not stand in
his way. His first experience of warfare was gained
on a day of terrible disaster. His father’s influence
had secured him a position which seemed in every
way desirable. He was attached to the staff of
Trajanus, a general of division in the army of the
Emperor Valens. By great exertions, travelling
night and day, at the hottest period of the year, the
<pb n='35'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>young Ælius contrived to report himself to his commander
on the eve of the great battle of Adrianople.
He had borne himself with admirable courage and
self-possession during that terrible day, more disastrous
to the Roman arms than even Cannæ itself.
He had helped to carry the wounded Emperor to a
cottage near the field of battle, and had barely
escaped with his life, cutting his way with desperate
resolution through the enemy, when this place of
refuge was surrounded and burnt by the barbarians.
After this unfortunate beginning he betook himself
for a time to the employments of peace, obtaining an
office under Government at Milan, where he renewed
his acquaintance with his old teacher, Augustine.
Then another opening, in what was still his favourite
profession, presented itself. The young soldier’s
gallant conduct on the disastrous day of Adrianople
had not been forgotten by some who had witnessed
it, and when Stilicho, then the rising general of the
Empire, was looking about for officers to fill posts
upon his staff, the name of Ælius was mentioned to
him. Under Stilicho he served with much distinction,
and it was on Stilicho’s recommendation
that he was appointed to the post which, when our
story opens, he had held for nearly twenty years.
</p>

<p>
His position during this period had been one of
singular difficulty. The tie between the Empire
and Britain was very loose. More than once during
<pb n='36'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>Ælius’ tenure of office it had seemed to be broken
altogether. Pretender after pretender had risen
against the central power, and had declared his
province independent, and himself an Emperor.
The Count of the Saxon Shore had contrived to
keep himself neutral, so to speak, during these
troubles. His own office, that of defending the
eastern and southern shores of the island against the
attacks of the Saxon pirates, he had filled with remarkable
vigilance and skill. And the usurpers had
been content to leave him undisturbed. His sailors
were profoundly attached to him, and any attempt
to interfere with him would have thrown a considerable
weight into the opposite scale. And he and his
work were necessary. Whether Britain was subject
to Rome or independent of it, it was equally important
that its coasts should not be harried by
pirates. If Ælius would provide for this—and he
did provide for it, with an almost unvarying success—he
might be left alone, and not required to give in his
allegiance to the new claimant of the throne. This
allegiance he never did give in. He was always the
faithful servant of those who appointed him, and,
whoever might happen to be the temporary master
of Britain, regularly addressed his despatches and
reports to the central authority in Italy. On the
other hand, he did not feel himself bound to take
direct steps towards asserting that authority in the
<pb n='37'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>island. He had to keep the pirates in check, and
that was occupation quite sufficient to keep all his
energies employed. Thus, as has been said, he
observed a kind of neutrality, always loyal to the
Roman Emperor, but willing to be on friendly terms
with the rebel generals of Britain as long as they
left him alone, let him do his work of defending the
coast, and did not make any demands upon him
which his conscience would not allow him to satisfy.
</p>

<p>
Having thus sketched the career of the Count, we
must now say something about the house, which
now—it was early in the afternoon of the day following
the events described in the last chapter—was
just coming into sight.
</p>

<p>
The villa was the Count’s private property, and
had been purchased by him immediately on his
arrival in the island, for a reason which will be given
hereafter. It was a handsome house, and complete
in its way, with all that was necessary for a comfortable
residence, but not one of the largest of its kind.
Indeed, it may be said that what may be called the
<q>living</q> part of it was unusually small for the
dwelling of so distinguished a person as the Count.
It had been found large enough by its previous
owners, men of moderate means and, it so happened,
of small families; and the Count, feeling that his
occupation of it might be terminated at any time,
had not cared to add to it. Its situation was
re<pb n='38'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>markably pleasing. Behind it was a sheltering range
of hills,<note place="foot">The hills that run as far as Arreton and the valley of the
Medina.</note> keeping off the force of the south-westerly
winds, and then richly covered with wood. It was
not too near the sea, the Romans not finding that
the ceaseless disturbance of rising and falling tides
was an element of pleasure, though they could not
get too close to their own tideless Mediterranean;
but it was within an easy distance of the Haven.<note place="foot">Brading Haven.</note>
The convenience of this neighbourhood had indeed
been one of the Count’s reasons for selecting this
spot. But if the harsh, grating sound of the waves
upon the shingle did not reach the ears of the
dwellers in the villa, and the force of the sea winds
was somewhat broken for them by intervening cliffs,
they still enjoyed all the freshness and vitality of an
air that had come across many a league of water.
The climate, too, was genial, mild without being too
soft, mostly free from damp, though not exempt from
occasional mist, seldom troubled by frost or snow,
and, on the whole, not unlike some of the more
temperate regions of Italy.
</p>

<p>
The villa, with its belongings, occupied three sides
of a square, or rather rectangle, and was built nearly
to the points of the compass. The eastern side of
the square was open, thus giving a prospect
sea<pb n='39'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>wards. The western contained the principal living
rooms. The northern, too, was partly occupied by
bed-chambers and sitting-rooms, for which there
was no room in the comparatively small portion
which had been originally intended for the residence
of the owner and his family. Some of the workmen
employed lived in cottages outside the villa enclosure.
The southern was devoted to storehouses, workshops,
and all the miscellaneous buildings which
made a Roman villa, as far as possible, an establishment
complete in itself. The open space was
occupied by a pretty garden, which will be more
particularly described hereafter.<note place="foot">The villa consisted, it will be seen, of the three parts which
were commonly found in establishments of this kind. These
were called respectively the <foreign lang="la" rend='italic'>Urbana</foreign>, containing the rooms in
which the family resided, and including also the garden
terraces, &amp;c.; the <foreign lang="la" rend='italic'>Rustica</foreign>, occupied by slaves and workmen
but in this case, as will be seen, partly used for another purpose;
and the <foreign lang="la" rend='italic'>Fructuaria</foreign>, containing cellars for wine, &amp;c., barns,
granaries, and storehouses of various kinds.</note>
</p>

<p>
The eastward front of the villa was occupied for
the greater part of its length by a colonnade or
corridor. A low wall of about four feet in height
separated this from the garden; above the wall it was
open to the air; but an overhanging roof helped
greatly to shelter it, while the view into the garden
was unimpeded. The floor was adorned with a
handsome tesselated pavement, the principal device
<pb n='40'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>of which was a representation of the favourite subject
of Orpheus attracting beasts and birds by his
lyre. The proprietor from whom the Count had
purchased the villa had brought it from Italy. He
was a Christian of artistic tastes, and, like his fellow-believers,
had delighted to trace in the old myth a
spiritual meaning, the power of the teaching of
Christ to subdue to the Divine obedience the savage,
animal nature of man. He had displaced for it the
original design, which, indeed, was nothing better
than a commonplace representation of dancing
figures which had satisfied the earlier owners. The
artist had included among the listeners animals,
some of which, as the monkey, the Thracian minstrel
could hardly have seen, and, with a certain touch of
humour, he had adorned the monkey’s head with a
Phrygian cap, like that which Orpheus himself
wore, to indicate probably that the monkey is the
caricature of man. The inner wall was ornamented
with a bold design of Cæsar’s first landing in
Britain, worked in fresco. Seats and tables were
arranged along it at intervals, and the whole corridor
was thus made to furnish a pleasant promenade in
winter and a charming resort when the weather was
warm.
</p>

<p>
At the south end of the corridor was the Count’s
own apartment, or study, as it would be called in a
modern house. One window looked into the corridor,
<pb n='41'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>into which a door also opened; another, which was
built out into the shape of a bow, so as to catch as
much of the sun as the aspect allowed, looked into
the garden. Part of it was formed of lattices, which
admitted of being completely closed when the weather
required such protection; the rest was glazed with
glass, which would have seemed rough to the present
generation, but was quite as good as most people
were content to have in their houses fifty years ago.
The pavement was tesselated, and presented various
designs, a Bacchante, and a pair of gladiators among
them. These, however, were commonly covered with
thick woollen rugs, the villa being chiefly used as a
winter residence. The Count had not forgotten his
early studies, and some handsome bookcases contained
his favourite authors, among which were to
be found the great classic poets of Rome, Tacitus,
for whom he had a special regard, some writers on
the military art, Cato and Columella on agriculture,
and, not least honoured, though some, at least, of
their contents had but little interest for him—for,
sincere Christian as he was, he cared little for
controversy—the numerous treatises of his friend
and teacher, Augustine. Behind this room was a
simple furnished bed-chamber, showing in an almost
bare simplicity the characteristic tastes of a soldier.
</p>

<p>
At the other end of the corridor was a door
leading to the principal chamber in this part of the
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>villa. This measured altogether close upon forty feet
in length, but it was divided, or rather could be divided,
into two by columns which stood about halfway down
its longer sides, and between which a curtain could be
hung. When the chamber was occupied in summer
it might be used as a whole; in the winter the
smaller part, which looked out into the garden, could
be shut off from the rest by drawing the curtain, and
so made a comfortable room, warmed from below by
hot air from the furnace, which had been constructed
at the western end of the northern wing of the villa.
Much artistic skill had been expended on the pavements
of the apartment, and the smaller chamber
was very richly decorated in this way. In the
middle was a large head of Medusa, and the rest
was filled with beautifully-worked scenes illustrating
the pleasures of a pastoral life. It was the custom
of the Count’s family to use the larger portion of the
whole chamber as a dining-room, the smaller as a
ladies’ boudoir. On the rare occasion of some large
entertainment being given, the whole was thrown
into one.
</p>

<p>
The ladies of the family, of whom we shall hear
more hereafter, had their own apartments at the
western end of the north wing, part of which was
shut off for their occupation and for their immediate
attendants. A covered way connected this with the
portion occupied by the Count.
</p>

<pb n='43'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>

<p>
It would be needless to describe the rest of the
villa. It was like the houses of its kind, houses
which the Romans erected wherever they went in as
close an imitation as they could make of what they
were accustomed to at home.
</p>

<p>
The garden, however, must not be wholly passed
over. Spacious and handsome as it was, it in part
presented a stiff and unnatural appearance, looking,
in fact, somewhat theatrical, as contrasted with the
pastoral sunniness of the landscape. A Roman gardener
had been brought from Rome—one skilled in all
the arts of his craft. It was he who had terraced the
slope with so much regularity, had planted stiff box
hedges—and, above all, it was his taste which led him
to cut and train box and laburnum shrubs into fantastic
imitations of other forms. The poor trees were
forced to abandon their own natural shapes, and to pose
as vases, geometrical figures, and animals of various
kinds. There was even a ship of box surrounded
by a broad channel of water, so that the spectator,
making large demands on his imagination, might
imagine that the little mock vessel was moored on a
still sheet of water. Among the box trees were stone
fountains badly copied from classic models. But
these had not remained in their bare crudity. The
loving British ivy had crept close around them, and
added a grace which the sculptor had failed to give.
The Roman gardener would have liked to banish
<pb n='44'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>this intruder, or to at least train it into the positions
prescribed by horticultural rules, but he had been
bidden to let it run at its own sweet will; and so it
had, and had flourished, well nursed by the soft and
humid atmosphere.
</p>

<p>
Scattered at regular intervals through the green
were flower-beds stocked with plants, which were
either native to the island, or had been brought
hither with great care from the capital. There were
roses in several varieties, strange-shaped orchids,
which had been found growing wild at lower levels
of the island, and adopted into this civilized garden
to ornament it with their unique beauty. Gay
geraniums and other flowers made throughout the
summer bright patches of colour in striking contrast
to the dark green.
</p>

<p>
These beds were enclosed by borders. Between
these enclosures were curiously-cut letters of growing
box, which perpetuated—at least for the life-time of
the shrub—the gardener’s own name or that of his
master, or classic titles, to serve as designations for
certain portions of the place. In the midst of the
garden several luxuriant oaks and graceful elms had
been allowed to retain in their native freedom the
shapes into which they had been growing for so
many years. They cast wide shadows, and gave a
softened aspect to the unnatural shapes of the
trained growths.
</p>

<pb n='45'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>

<p>
Beyond the floral division of the garden was
another enclosure for pear and apple trees. They
stood on a green sward, soft as velvet, and of a
deeper hue than Italian suns permit to the grass on
which they smile. Here, too, were foreign embellishments.
The monotony of the uniform rows
of fruit trees was varied by pyramids of box, and the
whole orchard was surrounded by a belt of plane
trees.
</p>

<p>
A circle of oaks had been left at the summit of one
of the terraces. Thick hedges were planted between
the trees, making a dense wall, in which openings
were cut for the view, so that the vista was visible,
like a picture set in a dark frame. This green room,
roofed by the sky, was paved with a mosaic of the
bright coloured chalk from the cliffs at the western
end of the island, and contained an oblong basin of
water shaped like a table. The water flowed
through so gently that the surface always seemed
at rest, and yet never grew warm. Couches were
placed at this fountain table, and from time to time
repasts were served here, certain viands being placed
in dishes shaped like swans or boats, which floated
gracefully on the watery surface. The more solid
meats were placed on the broad marble edges of the
basin.
</p>

<p>
This sylvan retreat seemed made for a meeting
of naiads and nereids. In short, the spot was so
<pb n='46'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>sheltered, the outlook over sea and land both near
and across the strait so fair, that one could well
believe even Pliny’s famed Tuscan garden, which
may have suggested some features of this British
one, was not more happily placed.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="5" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='47'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
<index index="toc" level1="V. Carna"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="V. Carna"/>
<head>CHAPTER V.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">CARNA.</hi></head>

<p>
When Ælius had come, some eighteen years before
the beginning of our story, to take up his command
on the coast of Britain, he had brought with him
his young wife. This lady, always delicate in
health, had not long survived her transplantation to
a northern climate. Six months after her arrival in
Britain she had died in giving birth to a daughter.
The child was entrusted to the care of a British
woman, wife of the sailing master of one of the
Roman ships, who had reared her together with her
own daughter. When little Ælia was but a few
weeks old her foster-mother had become a widow,
her husband having met with his death in a desperate
encounter with one of the Saxon cruisers. This
misfortune had been followed by another, the loss of
her two elder children, who had been carried off by
a malarious fever. The widow, thus doubly bereaved,
had thankfully accepted the Count’s offer that she
<pb n='48'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>should take the post of mother of the maids in his
household. Her foster-daughter, a feeble little thing,
whom she had the greatest difficulty in rearing, was
as dear to her as was her own child, and the new
arrangement ensured that she should not be separated
from her. For ten years she was as happy
as a woman who had lost so much could hope to be.
She had the pleasure of seeing her delicate nursling
pass safely through childhood, and grow into a
handsome, vigorous girl. Then her own call came;
and feeling that her earthly work was done, she had
been glad to meet it. The Count, who was a frequent
visitor to her deathbed, had no difficulty in promising
her that the two children should never be separated.
Indeed he could not have divided the pair even had
he wished. Every wish of the ten-year-old Ælia
was as a law to him, and Ælia would have simply
broken her heart to lose her playmate and sister
Carna.
</p>

<p>
The two friends were curiously unlike in person
and disposition. Ælia was a Roman of the Romans.
Her hair was of a shining blue-black hue, and so abundant
that when unbound it fell almost to her knees.
Her black eyes, soft and lustrous in repose, and
shaded with lashes of the very longest, could give an
almost formidable flash when anything had roused
her to anger. Her complexion was a rich brown,
relieved by a slight ruddy tinge; her features regular,
<pb n='49'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>less delicately carved, indeed, than the Greek type,
but full of expression, which was tender or fiery,
according to her mood. Her figure was somewhat
small, but beautifully formed. If Ælia was unmistakably
Roman, Carna showed equally clearly one of
the finest British types. She was tall, overtopping her
companion by at least a head; her hair, which fell in
curls about her shoulders, was of a glossy chestnut;
her eyes of the very deepest blue; her complexion,
half-way between blonde and brunette, mantled with
a delicate colour, which deepened, when her emotions
were touched, into an exquisite blush; her forehead
was somewhat low, but broad, and with a rare
promise both of artistic power and of intelligence;
her nose would have been pronounced by a casual
observer to be the most faulty feature in her face;
and it is true that its outline was not perfect. But
the same observer, after a brief acquaintance, would
probably have retracted his censure, and owned that
this feature suited the rest of her face, and would have
been less charming if it had been more perfect. Ælia
was impulsive and quick of temper, honest and affectionate,
but not caring to go below the surface of
things, and without a particle of imagination. Carna,
on the other hand, seemed the gentlest of women.
Those blue eyes of hers were ready to express affection
and pity; but no one—not even Ælia, who could
be exceedingly provoking at times—had ever seen a
<pb n='50'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>flash of anger in them. But her nature had depths
in it that none suspected to be there; it was richly
endowed with all the best gifts of her Celtic race.
She had a world of her own with which the gay
Roman girl, whom she loved so dearly, and with
whom she seemed to share all her thoughts, had
nothing to do. Music touched her soul in a way of
which Ælia, who could sing very charmingly, and
play with no little expression on the <foreign lang="la" rend='italic'>cithara</foreign>, had no
conception. And though she had never written, or
even composed, a verse, and possibly would never
write or compose one, she was a poetess. At present
all her soul was given to religion, religion full of the
imagination and enthusiasm which has made saints
of so many women of her race. The good British
priest, to whose flock she belonged, a worthy man
who eked out his scanty income<note place="foot">The British bishops were notoriously poor, and their clergy
were doubtless still more slenderly provided for.</note> by working a small
farm, was perplexed by her enthusiasm. She was not
satisfied with the duties of adorning the little church
where he ministered, and its humble altar-cloths
and vestments, by the skill of her nimble fingers,
of aiding the chants with the rich tones of her beautiful
voice, of ministering to the sick. She performed
these, indeed, with devotion, but she demanded more,
and the good man did not know how to satisfy her.
In addition to her other gifts Carna had that of being
<pb n='51'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>a born nurse. It was her first impulse to fly to the help
of anything—whether it was man, or beast, or bird—that
was sick or hurt, just as it was Ælia’s impulse,
though she mastered it at any strong call of duty, to
avoid the sight of suffering. She had now heard that
a prisoner had been brought in desperately wounded,
and she could not rest till she knew whether she
could do anything for the poor creature’s soul or
body. Ælia was as scornful as her love for her foster-sister
allowed her to be.
</p>

<p>
<q>My dearest Carna,</q> she cried, <q>what on earth
can make you trouble yourself in this fashion about
this miserable creature? They are the worst plagues
in this world, these Saxons, and it would be a blessing
to the world if it were well quit of the whole race
of them! A set of pagan dogs!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, sister,</q> said Carna, her eyes brimming with
tears, <q>that is the worst of it. A pagan, who has
never heard of the Blessed Lord, and now, they say,
he is dying! What shall we do for him?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But surely,</q> returned the other, <q>he is no
worse off than his threescore companions who went
to the bottom the other day.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>God be good to them,</q> said Carna, <q>but then
we did not know them, and that seems to make a
difference. And to think that this poor creature
should be so near to the way and not find it. But I
must go and see him.</q>
</p>

<pb n='52'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>

<p>
<q>It will only tear your poor, tender heart for no
purpose. You had far better come and talk to
father.</q>
</p>

<p>
Carna was not to be persuaded, but hurried to the
chamber to which the wounded man had been borne.
</p>

<p>
It was evident at first sight that the end was not
far off. The dying Saxon lay stretched on a rude
pallet. He was a young man, who could scarcely
have seen as many as twenty summers, for the down
was hardly to be seen on his upper lip and chin.
His face, which was curiously fair for one who had
followed from infancy an outdoor life, was deadly
pale, a pathetic contrast with the red-gold hair which
fell in curly profusion about it. His eyes, in which
the fire was almost quenched, were wide open, and
fixed with an unchanging gaze upon a figure that
stood motionless at the foot of the bed. This was
his brother, who had been permitted by the humanity
of the Count to be present. They had been exchanging
a few sentences, but the dying man was
now too far gone to speak, and the two could only
look their last farewell to each other. It was a pitiful
thing to see the twins, so like in feature and form,
but now so different, the one, prisoner as he was, full
of life and strength, the other on the very threshold
of death.
</p>

<p>
By the side of the wounded man stood the household
physician, a venerable-looking slave, who had
<pb n='53'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>acquired such knowledge of medicine and surgery
as sufficed for the treatment of the commoner
ailments and accidents. This case was beyond his
skill, or indeed the skill of any man. He could do
nothing but from time to time put a few drops of
cordial between the sufferer’s lips. Next to the
physician stood the priest, and his skill, too, seemed to
be at fault. A messenger, sent by Carna, had warned
him that a dying man required his ministrations, but
had added no further particulars, and the worthy
man, who was busy at the time in littering down his
cattle, had hastily changed his working dress for his
priestly habiliments, and had come ready, as he
thought, to administer the last consolations of the
Church to a dying Christian. The case utterly perplexed
him. He had tried the two languages with
which he was familiar, and found them useless. No
one had been able to understand a single word of the
dialogue which had passed between the brothers.
The dying stranger was as hopelessly separated from
him and the means of grace that he could command
as if he had been a thousand miles away.
He could not even venture—for his theology was of
the narrowest type—to commend to the mercy of God
the passing soul of this unbaptized heathen.
</p>

<p>
Carna understood the situation at a glance. She
saw death in the Saxon’s face; she saw the hopeless
perplexity in the expression of the priest.
</p>

<pb n='54'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>

<p>
<q>Father,</q> she cried, <q>can you do nothing, nothing
at all for this poor soul?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>My daughter,</q> said the priest, <q>I am helpless.
He knows nothing; he understands nothing.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Can you not baptize him?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Baptize him without a profession of repentance,
without a confession of faith! Impossible!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Will you let him perish before your eyes without
an effort to save him?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Child,</q> said the priest, with some impatience in
his tone, <q>I have told you that I am helpless. It
was not I that brought these things about.</q>
</p>

<p>
The girl cast an agonized look about the room, as
of one that appealed for help, and seized a crucifix
that hung upon the wall. She threw herself upon
her knees by the bedside, and after pressing the
symbol of Redemption passionately to her lips, held
it to the mouth of the dying man. The Saxon, on
his first entrance into the room, had removed his
look from his brother and fixed it steadfastly on this
beautiful apparition. Clad in white from head to
foot, with a golden girdle about her waist, her eyes
shining with excitement, her whole face transfigured
by a passion of pity, she seemed to him a vision from
another world, one of the Walhalla maidens of
whom his mother had talked to him in days gone by.
His lips closed feebly on the crucifix which she held
to them; a smile lighted up his fading eyes, and he
<pb n='55'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>muttered with his last breath <q>Valkyria.</q> The girl
heard the word and remembered without understanding
it. The next moment he was dead, and one of
the women standing by stepped forward and closed
his eyes.
</p>

<p>
Carna burst into a passion of tears.
</p>

<p>
<q>He is gone,</q> she cried, amidst her sobs, <q>he
is gone, and we could not help him.</q>
</p>

<p>
The priest was silent. He had no consolation to
offer. Indeed, but that he recognized the girl’s saintliness—a
saintliness to which he, worthy man as he
was, had no pretensions—he would have thought her
grief foolish. But the old physician could not keep
silence.
</p>

<p>
<q>Pardon me, lady,</q> he said, <q>if I seem to reprove
you. I pray you not to suffer your zeal for the salvation
of souls to overpower your faith. Do you
think that the All-Father does not love this poor
stranger as well as you, nay, better than you can love
him? that He cannot care for him as well? that
you, forsooth, must save him out of His hands? Nay,
my daughter—pardon an old man for the word—do
not so distrust Him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You are right, father, as always,</q> said the girl.
<q>I have been selfish and faithless. I was angry, I
suppose, to find myself baffled and helpless. You
must set me a penance, father,</q> she added, turning
to the priest.
</p>

<pb n='56'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>

<p>
The Saxon meanwhile had contrived by his gestures
to make his guards understand that he wished to
take his farewell of his dead brother. They allowed
him to approach the bed. He stooped and kissed the
lips of the dead, and then, choking down the sobs
which convulsed his breast, turned away, seemingly
calm and unmoved. But as he passed Carna he contrived
to catch with his manacled hands one of the
flowing sleeves of her white robe, and to lift the
hem to his lips.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="6" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='57'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
<index index="toc" level1="VI. The Saxon"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="VI. The Saxon"/>
<head>CHAPTER VI.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">THE SAXON.</hi></head>

<p>
It was not easy to know what should be done with
the survivor of the two Saxon captives. The villa
had no proper provision for the safe custody of
prisoners; and the problem of keeping a man under
lock and key, without a quite disproportionate
amount of trouble, was as difficult as it would be in
the ordinary country house of modern times.
</p>

<p>
<q>I shall send him to the camp at the Great
Harbour,</q> said the Count, a few days after the scene
described in our last chapter. <q>It is quite impossible
to keep him unless we chain him hand and foot, or
set half a dozen men to guard him; and even then
he is such a giant that he might easily overpower
them. At the camp they have got a prison, and
stocks which would hold him as fast as death.</q>
</p>

<p>
Carna’s face clouded over when she heard the
Count’s determination, but she said nothing. The
lively Ælia broke in—
</p>

<pb n='58'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>

<p>
<q>My dear father, you will break poor Carna’s
heart if you do anything of the kind. She is bent
on making a convert of the noble savage. And anyhow,
whatever else she may induce him to worship,
he seems ready, from what I have seen, to worship
her. And besides, what harm can he do? He has
no arms, and he can’t speak a word of any language
known here. If he were to run away he would
either be killed or be starved to death.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, Carna,</q> said the Count, with a smile,
<q>what do you say? Will you stand surety for this
young pagan? Or shall I make him your slave, and
then, if he runs away, it will be your loss?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I hope,</q> said the girl, <q>that you won’t send
him to the camp, where, I fear, they hold the lives
of such as he very cheap.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well,</q> replied the Count, <q>we will keep him
here, at all events for the present, and I will give
the bailiff orders to give him something to do in the
safest place that he can think of.</q>
</p>

<p>
Accordingly the young Saxon was set to work at
the forge attached to the villa, and proved himself a
willing and serviceable labourer. No more suitable
choice, indeed, could have been made. That he was
a man of some rank at home everything about him
seemed to show—nothing more than his hands,
which were delicate, and unusually small in proportion
to his almost gigantic stature. But the
<pb n='59'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>greatest chief among his people would not have
disdained the hammer and anvil. Was not Thor a
mighty smith? And was it not almost as much a
great warrior’s business to make a good sword as to
wield it well when it was made? So the young
man, whose mighty shoulders and muscular arms
were regarded with respect and even astonishment
by his British fellow-workmen, laboured with a will,
showing himself no mean craftsman in the blacksmith’s
art. Sometimes, as he plied the hammer, he
would chant to himself, in a low voice, what sounded
like a war-song. Otherwise he remained absolutely
silent, not even attempting to pick up the few
common words which daily intercourse with his
companions gave him the opportunity of learning.
There was an air of dignity about him which seemed
to forbid any of the little affronts to which a prisoner
would naturally be exposed; his evidently enormous
strength, too, was a thing which even the most
stupid of his companions respected. Silent, self-contained,
and impassive, he moved quietly about his
daily tasks; it was only when he caught a glimpse
of Carna that his features were lighted up for a moment
with a smile.
</p>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: Cedric at the Forge.]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><anchor id="fig058"/><figure url="images/i_073.jpg" rend="w100"><index index="fig" level1="Cedric at the Forge"/>
<head><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cedric at the Forge.</hi></head>
<figDesc>Cedric at the Forge</figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<p>
The idea of opening up any communication with
him seemed hopeless, when an unexpected, but still
quite natural, way out of the difficulty presented
itself. An old peddler, who was accustomed to
<pb n='60'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>supply the inmates of the villa with silks and
jewellery, and who sometimes had a book in his
pack for Carna, paid in due course one of his periodical
visits. The old man was a Gaul by birth, a
native of one of the States on the eastern bank of
the Rhine, and in youth he had been an adventurous
trader, extending his journeys eastward and northward
as far as the shores of the Baltic. The
risk was great, for the Germans of the interior
looked with suspicion on the visits of civilized
strangers; but, on the other hand, the profits were
considerable. Amber, in pieces of a size and clearness
seldom matched on the coasts of Gaul and
Britain, and beautiful furs, as of the seal and the
sea-otter, could be bought at very low prices from
these unsophisticated tribes, and sold again to the
wealthy ladies of Lutetia<note place="foot">Lutetia Parisiorum, now Paris.</note> and Lugdunum<note place="foot">Now Lyons.</note> at a very
considerable advantage. In these wanderings
Antrix—for that was the peddler’s name—had
acquired a good knowledge of the language—substantially
the same, though divided into several
dialects—spoken by the German tribes; and, indeed,
without such knowledge his trading adventures
would have been neither safe nor profitable. As he
approached old age Antrix had judged it expedient
to transfer his business from Gaul to Britain. Gaul
<pb n='61'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>he found to be a dangerous place for a peaceable
trader, having lost more than once all the profits of
a journey, and, indeed, a good deal more, by one of
the marauding bands by whom the country was
periodically overrun. Britain, or at least the
southern district of Britain, was certainly safer, and
it was this that for the last ten years he had been
accustomed to traverse, till he had become a well-known
and welcome visitor at every villa and settlement
along the coast.
</p>

<p>
Here then chance, or, as Carna preferred to think,
Providence, had provided an interpreter; and it so
happened that, whether by another piece of good
fortune, or an additional interposition, his services
were made permanently useful. The old man had
found his journeys becoming in the winter too
laborious for his strength, and it was not very
difficult to persuade him to make his home in the
villa for two or three months till the severity of the
season should have passed. Every one was pleased
at the arrangement. Antrix was an admirable teller
of tales, and his had been an adventurous life, full
of incident, with which he knew how to make the
winter night less long. The Count saw a rare
opportunity, such as had never come to him before,
of learning something about the hardy freebooters
whom it was his business to overawe; and Carna
had the liveliest hopes of making a proselyte, if she
<pb n='62'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>could only make herself, and the message in which
she had so profound a faith, understood.
</p>

<p>
The young Saxon’s resolution and pride did not
long hold out against the unexpected delight of being
able once more to converse in his own language, and
he soon began to talk with perfect freedom—for,
he had no idea of having anything to conceal—about
his home and his people. He was the son,
they learnt from him, of the chief of one of the Saxon
settlements near the mouth of the Albis.<note place="foot">The Elbe.</note> The people
lived by hunting and fishing, and, more or less, by
cultivating the soil. But life was hard. The settlements
were crowded; game was growing scarce, and
had to be followed further afield every year; the
climate, too, was very uncertain, and the crops
sometimes failed altogether. In short, they could
not live without what they were able to pick up in
their expeditions to richer countries and more temperate
climates. On this point the young Saxon was
perfectly frank. The idea that there was anything
of which a warrior could possibly be ashamed in
taking what he could by the strong hand had evidently
never crossed his mind. To rob a neighbour
or fellow-tribesman he counted shameful—so much
could be gathered from expressions that he let drop;
as to others, his simple morality was this—to keep
what you had, to take what others could not keep.
<pb n='63'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>The Count found him curiously well informed on
what may be called the politics of Europe. He
was well aware of the decay of the Roman power.
Kinsmen and neighbours of his own had made their
way south to get their share in the spoil of the
Empire. Some, he had heard, had stopped to take
service with the enemy; some had come back with
marvellous tales of the wealth and luxury which
they had seen. About Britain itself he had very
clear views. The substance of what he said to the
Count was this: <q>You won’t stop here very long.
My father says that you have been weakening your
fleet and armies here for years past, and that you
will soon take them away altogether. Then we shall
come and take the country. It will hardly be in his
time, he says. Perhaps it may not be in mine. It
is only you that hinder us; it is only you that we
are afraid of. We shall have the island; we must
have it. Our own country is too small and too
barren to keep us.</q>
</p>

<p>
Of his own adventures the young Saxon had little
to say. This was the first voyage that he and his
brother had taken. Their father was in failing health,
and their mother, who had but one other child, a girl
some ten years younger, had kept them at home, till
she had been unwillingly persuaded that they were
losing caste by taking no part in the warlike excursions
of their countrymen. <q>We had a fairly successful
<pb n='64'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>time,</q> went on the young chief, with the absolute unconsciousness
of wrong with which a hunter might
relate his exploits; <q>took two merchantmen that had
good cargoes on board, and had a right royal fight
with the people of a town on the Gallic coast. We
killed thirty of them; and only five of our warriors
went to the Walhalla. Then we turned homeward,
but our ship struck on a rock near some islands far
to the west,<note place="foot">Probably the Channel Islands, always a dangerous place for
navigation.</note> and had almost gone to the bottom.
With great labour we dragged her ashore, and set to
work repairing her; but our chief smith and carpenter
had fallen in the battle, and we were a long time in
making her fit for sea. This was the reason why
we were going home so late, and also why we
lagged behind our comrades when you were chasing
us. By rights we were the best crew and had the
swiftest ship, but she had been clumsily mended, and
dragged terribly in the water.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Count listened to all this with the greatest
interest, and plied the speaker with questions, all of
which he answered with perfect frankness. He found
out how many warriors the settlement could muster,
what were the relations with their neighbours, whether
there had been any definite plans for a common expedition.
On the whole, he came to the conclusion
that though there was no danger of an overpowering
<pb n='65'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>migration from this quarter such as Western and
Southern Europe had suffered from in former times,
these sea-faring tribes of the East would be an increasing
danger to Britain as years went on. Personally
the prospect did not concern him greatly;
his fortunes were not bound up with the island. Still
he loved the place and its people; it troubled him to
see what dark days were in store for them. And
taking a wider view—for he was a man of large sympathies—he
was grieved to see another black cloud in
an horizon already so dark. Would anything civilized
be left, he thought to himself, when every part of
Europe has been swept by these hosts of barbarians?
</p>

<p>
Before long another source of interest was discovered
in the young Saxon. The Count happened
to overhear him chanting to himself, and though he
could not distinguish the words, he recognized in the
rhythm something like the camp-songs that he had
often listened to from German warriors in Stilicho’s
camp. Here again the peddler’s services as an interpreter
were put in requisition, and though the old
man’s Latin, which went little beyond his practical
wants as a trader, fell lamentably short of what was
wanted, enough was heard to interest the villa family,
which had a literary turn, very much. What the
young man had sung to himself was an early Saga,
a curious romance<note place="foot">Perhaps something like the early Saxon poem which we
know under the name of Beowulf.</note> of heroes fighting with monsters,
<pb n='66'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>as unlike as can be conceived to anything to be found
in Roman poetry—verse in its rudest shape, but still
making itself felt as a real poet’s work.
</p>

<p>
Lastly, Carna, now that she had found a way of
communicating her thoughts, threw herself with
ardour into the work of proselytizing the stranger.
Here the peddler was more at home in his task as
interpreter. Carna used the dialect of South Britain,
with which he was far more familiar than he was with
Latin—it differed indeed but little from his native
speech. The topics too were familiar, for he had
been brought up in the Christian faith, and though he
scarcely understood the girl’s zeal, he was quite
willing to help her as much as he could.
</p>

<p>
Carna found her task much more difficult than she
had expected. She had thought in her simple faith
that it would be enough for her to tell to the young
heathen the story of the Crucified Christ for him to
fall down at once and worship. He listened with
profound attention and respect. This, perhaps, he
would have accorded to anything that came from her
lips; but, beyond this, the story itself profoundly
interested him. But it must be confessed that there
was a good deal in it which did not commend itself
to his warrior’s ideal of what the God whom he could
worship should be. He was a soldier, and he could
scarcely conceive of anything great or good that
was outside a soldier’s virtues. The gods of his own
<pb n='67'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>heaven, Odin and Thor and Balder, were great conquerors,
armed with armour which no mortal blow
could pierce, wielders of sword and hammer which
were too heavy for any mortal arm to wield. He
could bow down to them because they were greater,
immeasurably greater than himself, in the qualities
and gifts which he most honoured. Now he was
called upon to receive a quite different set of ideas, to
set up a quite different standard of excellence. The
story of the Gospels touched him. It roused him
almost to fury when he heard how the good man who
had gone about healing the sick and feeding the hungry
had been put shamefully to death by His own
countrymen, by those who knew best what He had
done. If Carna had bidden him avenge the man
who had been so ungratefully treated, he would have
performed her bidding with pleasure. But to worship
this Crucified One, to depose for Him Odin, Lord of
Battles—that seemed impossible.
</p>

<p>
Still he was impressed, and impressed chiefly by
the way in which the preacher seemed to translate
into her own life the principles of the faith which she
tried to set forth to him. She had told him that this
Crucified One had died for him. He could not understand
why He should have done so, why He should
not have led His twelve legions of angels against the
wicked, swept them off from the face of the earth,
and established by force of arms a kingdom of justice.
<pb n='68'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>Still the idea of so much having been given, so much
endured for his sake touched him, especially when he
saw how passionately in earnest was this wonderful
creature, this beautiful prophetess, as, with the German
reverence for women, he was ready to regard
her, how eager she was to do him good, how little, as
he could not but feel, she thought of herself in comparison
with others.
</p>

<p>
As long as Carna dwelt on these topics she made
good way; when she wandered away from them, as
naturally she sometimes did, she was not so successful.
One day it unluckily occurred to her that she
would appeal to his fears.
</p>

<p>
<q>Do not refuse to listen,</q> she said to him, <q>for if
He is infinitely good to those who love Him, He can
also be angry with those who love Him not.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What will He do with them?</q> asked the young
Saxon.
</p>

<p>
<q>He will send them to suffer in everlasting fire.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah!</q> answered the youth, <q>I have heard from
our wise men of such a place into which Odin drives
cowards, and oath-breakers, and such as are false to
their friends. But they say it is a place of everlasting
cold, and this indeed seems to me to be worse
than fire.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes,</q> said Carna, <q>there is such a place of torment,
and it is kept not only for the wicked, as you
say, but for all who do not believe.</q>
</p>

<pb n='69'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>

<p>
<q>Will the Lord Christ then banish thither all who
do not own Him as their Master, and call themselves
by His name?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes—and think how terrible a thing it would be
if it should happen to you.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And that is why you are so anxious to persuade
me?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And why you were so troubled about my brother
when you could not make him understand before he
died?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes. Oh! it was dreadful to think he should
pass away when safety was in his reach.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And you think that the Lord Christ has sent him
to that place because he did not know Him?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I fear that it must be so.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Then He shall send me also. For how am I
better because I have lived longer? No—I will be
with my brother, whom I loved, and with my own
people.</q>
</p>

<p>
And neither for that day nor for many days to come
would he speak again on this subject. Carna was
greatly troubled; but she began to think whether
there might not be something in what the young man
had said.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="7" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='70'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
<index index="toc" level1="VII. A Pretender’s Difficulties"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="VII. A Pretender's Difficulties"/>
<head>CHAPTER VII.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">A PRETENDER’S DIFFICULTIES.</hi></head>

<p>
Our story must now go back a little, and take up
the course of events at the camp, where the look
of affairs was not promising. The donative promised
by Constantine on the day of his election had been
paid, but this had been done only after the greatest
exertions in wringing money out of unlucky traders,
farmers, and even peasants, who had been already
squeezed almost dry. All that had any coin left
were beginning to bury it,<note place="foot">Possibly the reason why so much buried money belonging
to the later days of the Roman occupation of Britain has been
found.</note> and though the collectors
of taxes, or loans, or gifts, or whatever else the
frequent requisition of money might be called, had
ingenious ways of discovering or making their owners
give up these hoards, it was quite evident that very
little more could be got out of Britain. The military
chest meanwhile was becoming alarmingly empty,
<pb n='71'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>and though money was still found somehow for the
larger camps, some of the less important garrisons had
been left for months with almost nothing in the way of
pay. What was to be done was a pressing question,
which had to be answered in some way within a few
days. If it was not so answered, it was tolerably
plain that Constantine would meet the fate of Marcus
and Gratianus. The Emperor himself (if we are to
give him this title) seemed to be very little troubled
by the prospect, and remained stolidly calm. His
elevation indeed had made the least possible difference
to him. He drank a better kind of wine, and
perhaps a little more—for his cups had been limited
by his means—but he did not run into excess. He was
still the same simple, contented, good-natured man
that he had always been. But his sons were of
another temper, though curiously differing from each
other. Constans the elder was an enthusiast, almost
a fanatic, a man of strong religious feeling, who
would have followed the religious life if it had been
possible, and who now, finding himself possessed of
power, had schemes of using it to promote his
favourite schemes. Julian the younger had ambitions
of a more commonplace kind. But both the brothers
were agreed in holding on to the power that had
been so strangely put into their father’s hands,
hands which, as he had very little will of his own,
were practically theirs.
</p>

<pb n='72'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>

<p>
A council was held at which Constantine, his two
sons, and three of the officers of highest rank were
present, and the urgent question of the day was
anxiously debated.
</p>

<p>
Julian began the discussion.
</p>

<p>
<q>The army,</q> he said, <q>must be employed, or it
will find mischief to do at home which all of us will
be sorry for.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have some one to introduce to your Majesty,</q>
said one of the officers present, <q>who may have
something to say which will influence your decision.
He is from Ierne,<note place="foot">Ireland. A similar incident is mentioned by Tacitus in his
life of Agricola. An Irish petty king, driven from his throne
by internal troubles, came to the Roman general and promised,
if he were restored, to bring the island under the dominion of
Rome. This is the first notice of the country that occurs in
history.</note> and brings me a letter from the
commander at Uriconium. He came last night.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Let him enter,</q> said Constantine, with his usual
dull phlegmatic voice.
</p>

<p>
The tribune went to the door of the chamber, and
despatched a message to his quarters. In a few
minutes the stranger was introduced into the council.
He was a man verging upon middle age, somewhat
short of stature, with a great bush of fiery-red hair,
which stood up from his head with a very fierce look,
a long, shaggy beard of the same colour, eyes of the
deepest blue, very bright and piercing, but with a
<pb n='73'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>wandering and unsteady look in them, and a ruddy
complexion which deepened to an intense colour on
his cheek bones and other prominent parts of his face.
Around his neck he wore a heavy twisted collar of
remarkably red gold. Massive rings of the same
metal adorned his fingers. His dress was of undyed
wool, and very rudely shaped, a curious contrast
to the richness of his ornaments. He was followed
into the room by an interpreter, a young native of
Northern Britain, who had been carried off by Irish
pirates from one of the ecclesiastical schools. He
had been taught Latin before his captivity, and, while
a captive, had made himself acquainted with the Irish
language, which indeed did not differ very much
from that spoken in Britain.<note place="foot">This was exactly what had happened not many years before
to St. Patrick, the Apostle of Ireland.</note> His task of interpreter
was not by any means an easy one to fulfil. The
Prince broke out into a rapid torrent of complaint,
invective, and entreaty, which left the young man,
who was not very expert in either of the languages
with which he had to deal, hopelessly behind. Then
seeing that he was not followed, he turned on his
unlucky attendant and dealt him a blow upon the
ear that sent him staggering across the room. Then
he seemed to remember himself, and began to tell
his story again at a more moderate rate of speed,
though he still from time to time, when he came to
<pb n='74'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>some peculiarly exciting part in the tale of his
wrongs, broke out into a rapid eloquence that
baffled all interpretation. The upshot of the story
was this—
</p>

<p>
He was, or rather had been, a small king in South-eastern
Ireland,<note place="foot">Probably somewhere near Wexford.</note> the eldest of four brothers, having
succeeded his father about ten years before. There
had been a quarrel about the division of some
property. The Prince was a little obscure in his
description of the property; indeed it was a matter
about which he was shrewd enough to say as little
as possible. But his hearers had no difficulty in
presuming that it consisted of spoil carried off from
Britain. The quarrel had come to blows. All the
nation had been divided into parties in the
dispute. Finally he had been compelled by his ungrateful
subjects to fly for his life. Would the
Emperor bring him back? He was liberal, even
extravagant, in his offers. He would bring the
whole island under his dominion. (As a matter of
fact, his dominions had never reached more than
seventy miles inland, and he had contrived to make
himself so hated during his ten years’ reign that he
had scarcely a friend or follower left.) And what an
island it was! There never was such a place. The
sheep were fatter, the cows gave more milk than in
any other place in the whole world. And there was
<pb n='75'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>gold too, gold to be had for the picking up; and
amber on the shores, and pearls in the rivers. In
short, it was a treasure-house of wealth, which was
waiting for the lucky first-comer.
</p>

<p>
<q>Are you a Christian?</q> asked Constans.
</p>

<p>
The exiled chief would have gladly said that he
was, and indeed for a moment thought of the
audacious fiction that his attachment to the new
faith had been one of the causes of his expulsion.
He was, in fact, a savagely bigoted pagan, and had
dealt very roughly with one or two missionaries who
had ventured into his neighbourhood. But he
reflected that the falsehood would infallibly be
detected, and would inevitably do him a great deal
of harm.
</p>

<p>
<q>No!</q> he exclaimed; <q>would that I were. But
there is nothing that I so much desire if only I
could attain to that blessing. But I promise to be
baptized myself, and to have every man, woman, and
child within my dominions baptized within a month,
if you will only bring me back to them.</q>
</p>

<p>
Even Constans thought this zeal to be a little
excessive.
</p>

<p>
<q>And how many men can you bring into the
field?</q> asked the more practical Julian; <q>and what
money can you find for the pay of the soldiers?</q>
</p>

<p>
The stranger was taken aback at these direct
questions.
</p>

<pb n='76'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>

<p>
<q>All my subjects, all my treasures are yours,</q> he
said, after a pause.
</p>

<p>
<q>I don’t believe,</q> said one of the tribunes in Latin
to Julian, <q>that he has any subjects besides this
wretched interpreter, or any treasure beyond what he
wears on his neck and his fingers.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Shall he withdraw?</q> said Julian to his father.
</p>

<p>
Constantine, who never spoke when he could avoid
speaking, answered by a nod, and the Irish Prince
withdrew.
</p>

<p>
<q>Let us have nothing to do,</q> said the practical
Julian, <q>with these Irish savages. They may cut
their own throats, and welcome, without our helping
them. The men, too, would rebel at the bare
mention of Ierne. It is out of the world in their
eyes, and I think they are about right. And as to
the gold and pearls, I don’t believe in them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Perhaps you are right,</q> <anchor id="corr076"/><corr sic="asid">said</corr> Constans; <q>but it
would be a great work to bring over a new nation to
the orthodox faith.</q>
</p>

<p>
Julian answered with a laugh. <q>My good brother,
we are not all such zealous missionaries as you. I
am afraid that preaching is not exactly the work
which our friends the soldiers are looking out for.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What does your Majesty say to an expedition to
chastise those thieving Picts? They grow more
insolent every day.</q>
</p>

<p>
This was the suggestion of one of the tribunes.
</p>

<pb n='77'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>

<p>
<q>What is to be got?</q> was Julian’s answer.
</p>

<p>
<q>Glory!</q> answered the tribune.
</p>

<p>
<q>Glory! What is that?—the men want pay and
plunder. These bare-legged villains haven’t so much
as a rag that you can take from them, and they have
a shrewd way of giving at least as many hard blows
as they take. No!—we will leave the Picts alone,
and only too thankful if they will do the same for us!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The Count of the Shore has not yet taken the
oath to his Majesty,</q> said an officer who had not
spoken before. <q>We might give some employment
to the men in bringing him to reason.</q>
</p>

<p>
Constantine spoke for the first time since the
council had begun its sitting—<q>The Count is a
good man and does his business well. Leave him
alone.</q>
</p>

<p>
Other suggestions were made and discussed without
any sensible approach to a conclusion, and the
council broke up, but with an understanding that it
should meet again with as little delay as possible.
</p>

<p>
On the afternoon of that very day an incident
occurred which convinced every one—if further conviction
was needed—that delay would certainly be
fatal.
</p>

<p>
A party of soldiers was practising javelin throwing,
and Constantine, who had been particularly expert
in this exercise in his youth, stood watching the
game. He had stepped up to examine the mark
<pb n='78'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>made by one of the weapons on the wooden figure
at which the men were throwing, when a javelin
passed most perilously near his head and buried itself
in the wood. It could not have been an accident;
no one could have been so recklessly careless as to
throw under the circumstances. Constantine was
as imperturbable as usual. Without a sign of fear
or anger, he said, <q>Comrades, you mistake; I am
not made of wood,</q> and, signing to his attendants,
walked quietly away. The incident, however, made
a great impression upon him, and a still greater
upon his sons.
</p>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: Javelin throwing.]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><anchor id="fig078"/><figure url="images/i_095.jpg" rend="w80"><index index="fig" level1="Javelin throwing"/>
<head><hi rend='smallcaps'>Javelin throwing.</hi></head>
<figDesc>Javelin throwing</figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<p>
The consultation was renewed and prolonged far
into the night, and, as no conclusion was reached,
continued on the next day. About noon an unexpected
adviser appeared upon the scene.
</p>

<p>
A message was brought into the council-chamber
that a merchant from Gaul had something of importance
to communicate to the Emperor. The
man was admitted, after having been first searched
by way of precaution. His dress was sober in cut
and colour, and he had a small pack such as the
wandering dealers in jewellery and similar light
articles were accustomed to carry. Otherwise he
was little like a trader; indeed, it did not need a very
acute or practised hand to detect in him a soldier’s
bearing, and even that of one who was accustomed
to command.
</p>

<pb n='79'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
<p>
<q>You have something to tell us?</q> said Julian.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, I have,</q> said the stranger, <q>but let me first
show you my credentials.</q>
</p>

<p>
He spoke in passable Latin, but with a decided
accent, which, strongly marked as it was, was not
recognized by any of those present. At the same time
he produced from a silken purse, which he wore like
a girdle round his waist, a small square of parchment.
It was a letter written in a minute but very
clear hand, and it had evidently been put for the
security of the bearer, who could thus more easily
dispose of it in case of need, into the smallest
possible compass. This was handed to Constantine,
who, in turn, passed it on to his elder son Constans,
he being the only one present who could read and
write with fluency. It ran thus:
</p>

<p rend="margin-top: 2; margin-bottom: 2">
<q><hi rend='italic'>Alaric, the son of Baltha, King of the Goths,
Emperor of the World, to Marcus, Emperor of Britain
and the West, greeting.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
A grim smile passed over Constantine’s face as he
heard this address. He muttered to himself,
<q><q>Marcus,</q> indeed! Those who write to the
Emperor of Britain must have speedy <anchor id="corr079"/><corr sic="(quote mark missing)">letter-carriers.</corr></q>
The letter proceeded thus:
</p>

<p rend="margin-top: 2; margin-bottom: 2">
<q><hi rend='italic'>I desire friendship and alliance with the nations who
are wearied and worn out with the oppressions and cruelties
of Rome, and for this purpose send this present by my
<pb n='80'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>trusty kinsman and counsellor Atualphus, to you who are,
I understand, asserting against the common tyrant of the
world the liberty of Britain and the West. I have not
thought it fit to trust more to writing, but commend to
you the bearer hereof, the aforesaid Atualphus, who is
acquainted with the mind and purpose of myself and of
my people, and with whom you may conveniently concert
such plans as may best serve our common welfare. Farewell.
Given at my camp at Æmona.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Marcus is no more,</q> said Julian. <q>He was
unworthy of his dignity. You are in the presence of
the most excellent Constantine, Emperor of Britain.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It matters not,</q> said the Goth, with a haughty
smile. <q>My lord the king will treat as willingly
with one as with another, so he be an enemy of
Rome!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And what does he propose? What would he
have us do?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Make common cause with him against Honorius
and Rome.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What shall we gain thereby?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Half of the Empire of the World.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How shall that be?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The King will march into Italy and attack the
Emperor in his own land. The Emperor will withdraw
all the legions that he yet controls for his own
defence. With them the King will deal. Then
<pb n='81'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>comes your opportunity. What does it profit you to
remain in this island, where nothing is to be won
either of glory or of riches. Cross over into Gaul
and Spain, which, wearied with oppression and
desiring above all things to throw off the Roman
yoke, will gladly welcome you. Your Cæsar shall
reign on this side of the Alps and the Pyrenees.
The future may bring other things, but that may
suffice for the present.</q>
</p>

<p>
The plan, so bold, and yet, it would seem, so
feasible, and presenting a ready escape out of a
situation that seemed hopeless, struck every one
present with a delighted surprise. Even the phlegmatic
Constantine was roused. <q>It shall be done,</q>
he said.
</p>

<p>
Some further conversation followed, which it is
not necessary to relate. Ways and means were
discussed. Questions were asked about the strength
and temper of the forces in Gaul and Spain, about
the feeling of the towns, and a hundred other matters,
with all of which Atualphus showed a curiously
intimate knowledge. When the Goth retired from
the council, he left very little doubt or hesitation
behind him.
</p>

<p>
<q>They are heretics—these Goths,</q> grumbled
Constans; <q>obstinate Arians every one of them, I
told——</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You shall convert them, my brother,</q> answered
<pb n='82'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>Julian, <q>when you are Bishop of Rome. When we
divide the West between us, that shall be your
portion.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It shall be done,</q> said Constantine again, as he
rose from his chair.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="8" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='83'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
<index index="toc" level1="VIII. The News in the Camp"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="VIII. The News in the Camp"/>
<head>CHAPTER VIII.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">THE NEWS IN THE CAMP.</hi></head>

<p>
That afternoon a banquet, which was as handsomely
set out as the very short notice permitted, was given
to all the officers in the camp. When the tables
were removed,<note place="foot">With us tables are cleared after a meal; with the Romans
they seem to have been actually removed.</note> Constantine, who had been carefully
primed by his sons with what he was to say, addressed
his guests. His words were few and to the
point. <q>Britain,</q> he said, <q>has been long enough
ruled by others. It is now time that she should
begin herself to rule. It was the error of those who
went before me to be content with the limits of this
island. But here there is not enough to content us.
Beyond the sea, separated from us by only a few
hours’ journey, lie wealthy provinces which wait for
our coming. A kindlier sky, more fertile fields,
richer and fairer cities than ours are there. We
have only to show ourselves, in short, to be both
<pb n='84'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>welcomed and obeyed. Half the victories which we
have won here to no profit over poverty-stricken
barbarians would have sufficed to give us riches even
beyond our desires. Henceforth let us use our arms
where they may win something for us beyond empty
honour and wounds. Follow me, and within a year
you shall be masters both of Gaul and Spain.</q>
</p>

<p>
The younger guests received this oration with
shouts of applause; visions of promotion and prize-money,
and even of the spoil of some of the wealthy
cities of the mainland floated before them. The older
men did not show this enthusiasm. Many of them
were attached to Britain by ties that they were very
loth to break. They had little to hope, but much to
fear, from a change. Still, they saw the necessity for
doing something; another year such as that which
had just passed would thoroughly demoralize the
army of Britain. Legions that get into the habit
of making emperors and killing them for their pastime
must be dealt with by vigorous remedies, and the
easiest and best of these was active service. In any
case it would have been impolitic to show dissent.
Many feigned, therefore, a joy which they did not
feel, and shouted approval when the Senior Tribune
exclaimed, <q>Comrades, drink to our chief, Constantine
Augustus, Emperor of Britain and the West.</q>
</p>

<p>
The revel was kept up late into the night, the young
Goth distinguishing himself by the marvellous depth
<pb n='85'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>of his draughts and the equally marvellous strength
of his head.
</p>

<p>
The Emperor retired early from the scene, and
Constans, who had little liking for these boisterous
scenes, followed his example, as did most of the older
men. One of these, the cheery centurion, who has
been mentioned more than once, we may follow to his
home.
</p>

<p>
Outside the camp had grown up a village of considerable
size, though it consisted for the most part
of humble dwellings. There were two or three
taverns, or rather drinking-shops, where the soldiers
could carouse on the thin, sour wine of the British
vineyards, or, if the length of their purses permitted,
on metheglin, a more potent drink, made from the
fermentation of honey. A Jew, driven by the restless
speculation of his race, had established himself in a
shop where he sold cheap ornaments to the soldiers’
wives, and advanced money to their husbands on the
security of their pay. A tailor displayed tunics and
cloaks, and a shoemaker sold boots warranted to
resist the cold and wet of the island climate. There
were a few cottages occupied by the grooms and
stablemen who attended to the horses employed in
the camp, by fishermen who plied their trade in the
neighbouring waters, and other persons of a variety of
miscellaneous employments in one way or other connected
with the camp. But just outside the main
<pb n='86'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>street, at the end nearest to the camp, stood a house
of somewhat greater pretensions. It was indeed a
humble imitation of the Roman villa, being built
round three sides of an irregular square, which was
itself occupied by a grass plot and a few flower beds.
It was to this that the Centurion Decius bent his
steps after the conversation related in the last chapter.
It was evidently with the reluctant step of the
bearer of bad news that he proceeded on his way.
As soon as he entered the enclosure his approach
was observed from within. Two blooming girls,
whose ages may have been seventeen and fifteen
respectively, ran gaily to meet him. A woman some
twenty-five years older, but still youthful of aspect
and handsome, followed at a more sober pace.
</p>

<p>
<q>What is the matter, father?</q> cried the elder of
the girls, who had been quick to perceive that all was
not right.
</p>

<p>
The centurion held up his hand and made a signal
for silence. <q>Hush,</q> he said; <q>I have something to
tell you, but it must not be here. Let us go indoors.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Shall the children leave us alone?</q> said the
centurion’s wife, who had now come up.
</p>

<p>
<q>No,</q> he answered, wearily, <q>let them be with us
while they can,</q> he added in a low voice, which only
the wife’s ears, made keenly alive by affection and
fear, could catch.
</p>

<p>
The gaiety of the young people was quenched,
<pb n='87'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>for, without having any idea of what had happened,
they could see plainly enough that something was
disturbing their parents; and it was with fast beating
hearts that they waited for his explanation.
</p>

<p>
<q>Our happy days here are over, my dearest,</q> said
the centurion, drawing his wife to him, and tenderly
kissing her, as soon as they were within doors.
</p>

<p>
<q>You mean,</q> said she, <q>that the order has come.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes,</q> he answered, <q>we are to leave as soon
as the transports can be collected. The resolution
was made to-day and will be announced to the
army to-morrow. It is no secret, I suppose, or will
not be for <anchor id="corr087"/><corr sic="(single quote mark)">long.</corr></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And where are we to go?</q> cried the elder of the
girls, whose face brightened as the thought of seeing
a little more of the world, of a home in one of the
cities of Gaul, possibly in Rome itself, flitted across
her mind.
</p>

<p>
The poor centurion changed colour. The girl’s
question brought up the difficulty which he knew had
to be faced, but which he would gladly have put off
as long as he could.
</p>

<p>
<q>We shall go to Gaul, certainly; where I cannot
say,</q> he answered, after a long pause, and in a
hesitating voice.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, how delightful!</q> cried the girl; <q>exactly
the thing that Lucia and I have been longing for.
And Rome? Surely we shall go to Rome, father?
<pb n='88'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>Are you not glad to hear it, mother? I am sure
that we are all tired of this cold, foggy place.</q>
</p>

<p>
The mother said nothing. If she did not exactly
see the whole of the situation, she had at least an
housewife’s horror of a move. The poor father moved
uneasily upon his chair.
</p>

<p>
<q>The legion will go,</q> he said, <q>but your mother
and you——</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, Lucius,</q> cried the poor wife, <q>you do not,
cannot mean that we are not to go with you!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nothing is settled,</q> he replied, <q>it is true; but
I am much troubled about it. <hi rend='italic'>You</hi> might go, though
I do not like the idea of your following the camp; but
these dear girls—and yet they cannot be separated
from you.</q>
</p>

<p>
The unhappy wife saw the truth only too clearly.
If the times had been quiet, she might herself have
possibly accompanied the legion in its march southward;
but even then she could not have taken her
daughters with her, her daughters whom she never
allowed to go within the precincts of the camp,
except on the one day, the Emperor’s birthday, when
all the officers’ families were expected to be present
at the ceremony of saluting the Imperial likeness.
And this had of late been omitted when it was
difficult to say from day to day what Emperor the
troops acknowledged. The centurion had spoken
only too truly; the legion might go, but they must
<pb n='89'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>stay behind. She covered her face with her hands
and wept.
</p>

<p>
<q>Lucia,</q> cried the elder girl to her sister, <q>we
will enlist; we will take the oath; I should make
just as good a soldier as many of the Briton lads
they are filling up the cohorts with now; though you,
I must allow, are a little too small,</q> she added, ruefully,
as she looked at her sister’s plump little
figure, too hopelessly feminine ever to admit the
possibility of a disguise. <q>Cheer up, mother,</q> she
went on, <q>we shall find a way out of the difficulty
somehow.</q> And she threw her arms round the
weeping woman, and kissed her repeatedly.
</p>

<p>
There was silence for a few minutes, broken at last
by the timid, hesitating voice of the younger girl.
</p>

<p>
<q>But must you go, father?</q> she said. <q>Surely
they don’t keep soldiers in the camp for ever. And
have you not served long enough? You were in the
legion, I have heard you say, before even Maria was
born.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>My child,</q> said the centurion, <q>it is true that
my time is at least on the point of being finished.
Yet I can’t leave the service just now. Just because
I am the oldest officer the Legate counts on me, and
I can’t desert him. It would be almost as bad as
asking for one’s discharge on the eve of a battle.
And besides, though I don’t like troubling your
young spirits with such matters, I cannot afford it.
<pb n='90'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>Were I to resign now I should get no pension, or
next to none. But in a year or two’s time, when
things are settled down, I hope to get something
worth having—some post, perhaps, that would give
me a chance of making a home for you.</q>
</p>

<p>
A fifth person, who had hitherto taken no part in
the conversation, and whose presence in the room
had been almost forgotten by every one, now broke in,
with a voice which startled the hearers by its unusual
clearness and precision. Lena, mother of the centurion’s
wife, had nearly completed her eightieth
year. Commonly, she sat in the chimney corner,
unheeding, to all appearances, of the life that went
on about her, and dozing away the day. In her
prime, and even down to old age, she had been a
woman of remarkable activity, ruling her daughter’s
household as despotically as in former days she had
ruled her own. Then a sudden and severe illness
had prostrated her, and she had seemed to shrink at
once into feebleness and helplessness of mind and
body. Her daughter and granddaughters tended her
carefully and lovingly; but she seemed scarcely to
take any notice of them. The only thing that ever
seemed to rouse her attention was the sight of her
son-in-law when he chanced to enter the chamber
without disarming. The shine of the steel brought
a fire again into her dim, sunken eyes. It was
probably this that had now roused her; and her
<pb n='91'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>attention, once awakened, had been kept alive by
what she heard.
</p>

<p>
<q>And at whose bidding are you going?</q> she said,
in a startlingly clear voice to come from one so
feeble; <q>this Honorius, as he calls himself, a feeble
creature who has never drawn a sword in his life!
Now, if it had been his father! He was a man to
obey. He did deserve to be called Emperor. I
saw him forty years ago—just after you were born,
daughter—when he came with his father. A splendid
young fellow he was; and one who would have his
own way, too! How he gave those turbulent Greeks
at Thessalonica their deserts! Fifteen thousand of
them!<note place="foot">Theodosius ordered a massacre at Thessalonica on account
of some offence offered to him by the populace of that city.</note> That was an Emperor worth having!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! mother,</q> cried her daughter, horrified to
see the old woman’s ferocity, softened, she had
hoped, by age and infirmity, roused again in all
its old strength. <q>Oh! mother, don’t say such
dreadful things. That was an awful crime in
Theodosius, and he had to do penance for it in
the church.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ay,</q> muttered the old woman, <q>I can fancy it
did not please the priests. But why,</q> she went on,
raising her voice again, <q>why does not Britain have
an Emperor of her own?</q>
</p>

<pb n='92'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>

<p>
<q>So she has, mother,</q> said the centurion. <q>You
forget our Lord Constantine.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Our Lord Constantine!</q> she repeated. <q>Who
is Constantine? Why, I remember his mother—a
slave girl—whom the Irish pirates carried off from
somewhere in the North. Constantine’s father
bought her, and married her. Why should he be
Emperor? I could make as good a one any day out
of a faggot stick.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Peace, dear mother,</q> said the centurion, soothingly,
afraid that her words might have other
listeners.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why not you,</q> went on the old woman, unheeding;
<q>you are better born.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I, Emperor!</q> cried the centurion. <q>Speak good
words, dearest mother.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well,</q> said the old woman, dropping her voice
again, <q>they are poor creatures now-a-days.</q> And
she relapsed into silence, looking again as wholly
indifferent to the present as if the strange outburst
of rage and impatience which her family had just
witnessed had never taken place.
</p>

<p>
The family discussed the position of affairs anxiously
till far into the night.
</p>

<p>
<q>And what will happen,</q> said the wife, <q>when the
legions are gone?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>There will be a British kingdom, I suppose;
and, if it were united, it might stand. But it
<pb n='93'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>will not be united. It will be every man for himself.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And how about the Saxons and the Picts? If the
legions hardly protected us from them, how will it be
when they are gone?</q>
</p>

<p>
The centurion’s look grew gloomier than ever. <q>I
know,</q> he said, <q>the prospect is a sad one. But
I hope that for a year you will be fairly safe; and
after that I shall hope to send for you. Or you
might go over to Gaul. But I hope to see the Count
of the Shore about these matters. He will give me
the best advice. Here, of course, you can hardly
stay, even if you cared to do it; and some place
must be found. Meanwhile, make all the preparations
you can for a move.</q>
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="9" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='94'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
<index index="toc" level1="IX. The Departure of the Legions"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="IX. The Departure of the Legions"/>
<head>CHAPTER IX.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">THE DEPARTURE OF THE LEGIONS.</hi></head>

<p>
The resolution to leave Britain was announced at
a general meeting of the soldiers on the following
day, and was received by it with tremendous enthusiasm.
To most who were present, Gaul seemed a
land of promise. It was from Gaul that almost every
article of luxury that they either had or wished to
have was imported, and some of the necessities of
life, as notably wine, were known to be both better
and cheaper there than in Britain. Comfortable
quarters in wealthy cities, which were ready to be
friendly, or could easily be brought to reason if they
were not; easy campaigns, not against naked Picts,
but against civilized enemies who had something
to lose; and when the time of service was over, a
snug little farm, with corn land, pasture, and vineyard,
and a hard-working native to till it—such were
the dreams which floated through the soldiers’ minds;
and they were ready to go anywhere with the man
<pb n='95'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>who promised to make them into realities. Older
and more prudent men who knew that there were two
sides to the question, and the unadventurous, who
were well content to stay where they were, could not
resist the tide of popular feeling, and concealed, if
they did not abandon, their doubts and scruples. As
money was scarce, the men volunteered to forego
their pay till it could be returned to them with large
interest in the shape of prize-money. They even
gave up to the melting pot the silver ornaments from
their arms and from the trappings of their horses.
The messengers who were sent with the tidings of the
proposed movement to the other camps—which were
now mainly to be found in the southern part of the
island—found the troops everywhere well disposed,
and within a few days every military station was alive
with the stir and bustle of preparations for a move.
</p>

<p>
One of the most pressing cares of the new leaders
of the army was the securing the means of transport.
There was a great number of merchant ships, indeed,
which could be pressed into the service, and which
would perform it very well if only the passage in the
Channel could be made without meeting opposition.
The question to be considered was whether they
could reckon upon this, or would the fleet, which
was still supposed to acknowledge the authority of
Honorius, prevent them from crossing. The chief
person to be reckoned with in this matter was, of
<pb n='96'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>course, the Count of the Shore, and a despatch was
immediately sent to him. It was the production of
Constans, and ran thus—
</p>

<p rend="margin-top: 2">
<q rend="post: none"><hi rend='italic'>Constantine, Emperor of Britain and the West, to
Lucius Ælius, Count of the Saxon Shore, greeting.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none"><hi rend='italic'>Having been called to Empire by the unanimous voice
of the People and Army of Britain, and desiring to give
deliverance from tyranny and protection from violence to
other provinces besides this my Island of Britain, I purpose
to transport such forces as it may be necessary to use
for this purpose to the land of Gaul. I call upon you
therefore, having full confidence in your loyalty, to give
me such assistance as may be in your power, for the accomplishment
of this end, and promise you, on the other hand,
my favour and protection. Farewell.</hi></q>
</p>

<p rend="margin-bottom: 2">
<q><hi rend='italic'>Given at the Camp of the Great Harbour.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
The Count received this communication about ten
days after his arrival at the villa. The writer would
scarcely have been pleased at the comments which
he made as he read it.
</p>

<p>
<q><q>Constantine, Emperor.</q> How many more Emperors
are we to have in this unlucky island? <q>Of
Britain and the West.</q> And I doubt whether he can
call a foot of ground his own fifty miles from the
camp. <q>To deliver other provinces from oppression
and violence.</q> Why not begin by trying his hand at
home? <q>Full confidence in my loyalty.</q> Truly
<pb n='97'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>valuable praise from so excellent a judge in the
matter. <q>Such assistance as may be in my power.</q>
Well, I should be glad to see the last of this crew of
adventurers and villains; but he sha’n’t have my
ships.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Count’s position indeed was one of singular
difficulty. He had thought it best—indeed he had
found it necessary, if he was to do his own work—to
keep on friendly terms with the usurpers who had
gone before Constantine. It had been quite hopeless
for him to attempt to coerce the legions. If they
chose to make Emperors for themselves, he must let
them do it, so long as they did not interfere with his
liberty as a loyal subject. But this was a different
matter. Crossing over into Gaul meant downright
hostility to the authorities in Italy. How could he
help it forward? And yet how could he prevent it?
He had three ships available. All the others were
laid up for the winter in harbours on the eastern and
south-eastern shores of the island. With these he
might do some damage to the legions in their passage;
but the passage he could not hope to prevent. And
if he did prevent it, what would be his own future relations
with the army? Clearly he could not stay
in Vectis, or indeed anywhere in Britain, for there
was no place which he could hope to hold against a
small detachment of the army. And to go, though
it could easily be done, and would save him a vast
<pb n='98'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>amount of trouble, would be to give up his whole
work, and to leave the unhappy inhabitants of the
coast without protection from the pirates of the East.
After long and anxious deliberation, which he did not
disdain to share with his daughter and Carna, he resolved
on a middle course, by following which he would
neither help nor hinder. The first thing was to seek
an interview with Constantine or his representatives,
and a messenger was accordingly despatched suggesting
a conference to be held on shipboard, under a
flag of truce, off the mouth of the Great Harbour.
</p>

<p>
The proposition was accepted, and three days afterwards
the conference was held, in the way that the
Count had suggested. Each party brought a single
ship, which was anchored for the greater convenience
of carrying on the conversation, but was perfectly
ready to slip its anchor in case of any threatening of
treachery. The Count’s vessel had the Imperial
standard at its mast-head; Constantine’s, on the other
hand, had no distinguishing characteristic. Both he
and his two sons were present, but the father was as
silent as usual, and the chief spokesman was Julian.
</p>

<p>
The Count was very brief in his greetings, and indicated,
as plainly as he could without saying it in so
many words, that he did not acknowledge the pretensions
of the usurper.
</p>

<p>
<q>My lord,</q> he said, <q>you have asked me to help
in the transport of your army across the Channel.
<pb n='99'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>Briefly then I have not the means. I have but
three ships ready for sea, and not one of these can
I spare.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The Emperor can command their services,</q> said
Julian.
</p>

<p>
<q>I have received no instructions from my master,</q>
returned the Count, <q>to use them except for the
protection of the coast.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You have them now,</q> said Julian, <q>and you will
refuse to obey them at your peril.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>My commission is made out by Flavius Honorius
Augustus, and I know no other to whom I can yield
obedience.</q>
</p>

<p>
A pause followed this plain speech; the party on
board with Constantine debated the situation with
some heat, Julian maintaining that the Count must
be brought to reason, the others being anxious to
keep on good terms with him.
</p>

<p>
<q>A single cohort can bring him to order,</q> cried the
young Prince.
</p>

<p>
<q>Can drive him out of the villa doubtless,</q> said
the more prudent Constans, <q>but not bring us an
inch nearer getting the ships.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>We may at least count on your friendship,</q> said
Constans, Julian retiring sulkily from the negotiations;
<q>you will not hinder the passage.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have nothing to do with the disposition of the
legions,</q> answered the Count, <q>and, as I said
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>before, have no instructions except to defend the
shore against the Pirates.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>His Majesty will not be ungrateful,</q> said
Constans.
</p>

<p>
<q>I owe no duty but to Honorius, and desire no
favour but from him,</q> was the Count’s reply, and the
conference was at an end.
</p>

<p>
The result was as favourable as Constantine could
have expected. At least no opposition would be
offered. Preparations for the passage were accordingly
hurried on with all possible speed. All the
towns along the coast were put under requisition
for all the shipping that they could furnish, and, for
the most part, were glad enough to answer the call.
Whatever might happen in the future, it would be
at least something to be rid of such troublesome
neighbours. If other legions were to come, they
might be more orderly and well-behaved. If these
were to be the last, perhaps this would be a change
for the better. Every one accordingly exerted himself
to the utmost to supply the demand for transports.
</p>

<p>
It was a curious medley of vessels that assembled
in the Great Harbour in the late autumn for the
embarkation of the army. Old ships of war that had
lain high and dry from before the memory of man
were hastily pitched over and launched. Merchant
vessels of every kind were there, from the huge hulks
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>that were accustomed to carry heavy cargoes of metal
from Cornwall, to the light barks that carried on the
trade in wine, olive oil, fruit, and such light goods
between Armorica and Britain; even the fishing
vessels from the villages along the coast were pressed
into the service, and laden to the full, sometimes even
to a dangerous depth, with military material and all
the miscellaneous property with which an army of
twenty thousand men would be likely to be encumbered.
The greater part of this force had been collected
at the Camp of the Great Harbour, which
indeed was overflowing, and more than overflowing,
with troops. But the garrisons that were situated to
the eastward, as at Regnum<note place="foot">Chichester.</note> and Anderida,<note place="foot">Pevensey.</note> were
to join the fleet as it sailed, while those from the
inland and coast stations of South and Eastern
Britain were to make the best of their way to the
Portus Lemanus. This was to be the rendezvous
for the whole force, and the point for commencing
the passage. The longer voyage, direct from the
Great Harbour to the mouth of the Sequana (the
Seine) or the projecting peninsula, now known as
Manche, was dreaded, for the Channel had even a
worse reputation in those days than it has now. It
was arranged, accordingly, that the flotilla should sail
along the coast as far as the Portus Lemanus, and cross
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>from thence to Bononia.<note place="foot">Boulogne.</note> The first half of November
had passed before the preparations for departure were
completed, and there were some who advised Constantine
to delay his passage till the following spring.
That he knew to be impossible; it was better to run
any risk of storm or shipwreck than to face the winter
with an ill-paid and discontented army.
</p>

<p>
At early dawn, on the fifteenth of the month, the
embarkation began, the munitions of war, stores, and
other baggage having been already, as far as was
possible, put on board of the heavier transports.
The water-gate of the camp was thrown open, and at
this Constantine, his sons, and his principal officers
took their place. The priest who served the church
within the camp offered a few prayers, and solemnly
blessed the eagle of the Second Legion, which constituted,
as has been said, the main part of the forces
in the camp. When this ceremony was concluded,
Constantine addressed the army.
</p>

<p>
<q>By this gate in the days of our ancestors Vespasian
led forth the Second Legion, then, as now, one
of the chief ornaments and supports of the Empire,
to execute the judgment of God on the rebellious
nation of the Jews, and to receive before long as his
reward the Empire of Rome. By this gate I lead
you forth, worthy successors as you are of those
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>who conquered with him, to a service not less
honourable, and certain to receive no less distinguished
a reward. Let my name, which recommended
me to your favour, and this place, already
famous as the starting-point of victorious armies,
be accepted as omens of success. Comrades, follow
me on a march which has for its end nothing less
than the Capitol of Rome.</q>
</p>

<p>
He then took his seat in a boat manned with a
picked crew, and, amidst shouts of applause from the
assembled soldiers and spectators, was rowed to the
ship, one of the few war galleys of recent construction
that were to be found in the fleet. Then began
the embarkation of the troops.
</p>

<p>
It was a singular scene. The news had spread
with the greatest rapidity through the whole countryside,
and the native population had crowded to
witness the departure. Every point from which
the sight could be seen was occupied by spectators.
Even the slopes of Portsdown were thickly dotted by
them. Nearer the camp the emotion and excitement
were intense. A regiment that marches out of a town
in which it has been in garrison for a year or two
leaves many sad hearts behind it; even so brief a
space is long enough for the binding of many ties.
But the legions had been almost permanent residents
in Britain, and they were bound to its people by
bonds many and close. And this people was not, it
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>must be remembered, the self-restrained English
race, so chary of sighs and groans, and so much
ashamed of tears, but a race of excitable Celts,
always ready to express all, and even more, than
they felt. Wives, children, kinsfolk, friends were now
to be left behind, and probably left for ever—for who
could believe that the legions, whose departure had
been threatened so long, could ever come back?
</p>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: The Departure of the Legions.]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><anchor id="fig104"/><figure url="images/i_123.jpg" rend="w100">
<index index="fig" level1="The Departure of the Legions"/>
<head><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Departure of the Legions.</hi></head>
<figDesc>The Departure of the Legions</figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<p>
The embarkation went on. Some of the lighters
could be brought close to the shore, and were
boarded by gangways. To others of heavier
burden the men had to be carried in boats. A
strong guard had been posted to keep the place of
embarkation clear. But the guard was powerless, or
perhaps unwilling—for who could deal harshly with
women and children so situated?—to check the rush
of the excited crowd. Some of the women threw
themselves on their departing husbands and lovers,
clasped them round their necks, or hung to their
knees. Others sat on the shore rocking themselves
to and fro, or frozen by the extremity of their grief into
stillness; some uttered shrill cries; others were sunk
in a speechless despair. Nor were there wanting scenes
of a less harrowing kind. Not a few of the departing
soldiers were breaking other obligations besides those
of the heart. Creditors were to be seen clinging to
debtors whom they saw vanishing out of their sight.
The Jew trader from the village outside the camp
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>seemed to be in despair. Probably he had secured
himself fairly well against the consequences of an
event which he must have been shrewd enough to
foresee; but to judge from the bitterness and frequency
of his appeals he was hopelessly ruined. He
swore by the patriarchs and prophets that he had
always carried on his business at a loss, and that if
his debts were not now settled in full he should be
reduced to beggary. The tavern-keepers were also
busy, running to and fro, getting, or trying to get,
payment of scores from customers whom they had
trusted. There were others who had something to
sell, some provisions for the voyage, a cloak, or a
mantle, and offered it as a bargain—not, however,
without a margin of profit—to dear friends with
whom they were not likely to have dealings again.
Other noisy claimants for attention were young
Britons who wanted to enlist. For days past these
had been flocking into the camp, and now that their
last chance was about to disappear, they became importunate
in the extreme. The numbers of the legions
could have been almost doubled from these candidates
for service.
</p>

<p>
Slowly, as ship after ship received its complement
of men, the turmoil on the shore lessened, and about
sunset the embarkation was completed. The weather
was beautifully calm, a light wind blowing from the
land during the day, and even this falling as the
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>light declined. When the moon rose—the time of
the full had been chosen for the embarkation—the
sea was almost calm. Then, amidst a great cry of
<q>Farewell,</q> from the shore, the fleet slowly moved
down the harbour. All night, making the most of
the favourable weather, it pursued its way along the
coast, being joined as it went by other detachments.
At the Portus Lemanus it found the fleet which
carried the garrisons of the eastern stations ready to
start, and the whole made its way without hindrance
across the Channel to Bononia, having as prosperous
a voyage as had the legions which more than four
hundred and fifty years before Cæsar had brought to
the island.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="10" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
<index index="toc" level1="X. Dangers Ahead"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="X. Dangers Ahead"/>
<head>CHAPTER X.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">DANGERS AHEAD.</hi></head>

<p>
The winter that followed the departure of the legions
was a busy time with the Count. He was now
almost the only representative of Roman power in
Southern Britain, and the villa on the island became
a place of considerable importance. A military force
of some strength was gathered there. Constantine’s
enterprise was not universally popular, and many
had taken any chance that offered itself of escaping
from it. Some had reached, or very nearly reached,
the end of their time of service, and claimed their
discharge; others were known to be loyal to Rome,
and were allowed to retire. Not a few of those who
found themselves without home or employment, and
did not happen to have friends or kinsfolk in Britain,
rallied to the Count. The families, too, of some that
had gone with the legions were glad to claim such
shelter and protection as the neighbourhood of the
villa could give. Among these were the wife and
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>daughters of the Centurion Decius; the old
mother had steadily refused to accompany them,
and, with an aged dependent of nearly the same age,
continued to occupy the house near the deserted
camp. It was an anxious matter with the Count
what was to be done with these helpless people.
While things were quiet they could live safely, if
not very comfortably, in the neighbouring village;
but if trouble were to come—and there were several
quarters from which it might come—they would
have to be sheltered somewhere in the villa. This
never could be made into a really strong place; but
it might serve well enough for a time and against
ordinary attack. Some of the outbuildings and
domestic offices were fortified as well as the position
admitted; such material of war as could be got was
accumulated, and provisions also were stored. The
most reliable resource, however, was in the ships of
war. These were not, as was usual, drawn up on
the beach for the winter, but were kept at anchor,
ready for immediate use.
</p>

<p>
Nor were these precautions unnecessary, for indeed,
as we shall see, mischief of a very formidable kind
was brewing, and indeed had been brewing ever
since the departure of the legions, and even before
that event. And it was mischief of a kind of which
it may safely be affirmed that neither the Count nor
any Roman official, had any notion. Britain, to
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>all appearance, had for many generations been
thoroughly subdued. Any Roman, if he had been
told that there was any danger of rebellion among
the Britons, would have laughed the suggestion to
scorn. The legions, indeed, had often been mutinous
and turbulent, and their generals ambitious and unscrupulous.
The island indeed had gained so bad a
reputation for loyalty to the Empire that it had been
called the mother of tyrants, by <q>tyrant</q> being
meant <q>usurper.</q> But whenever Rome had been
defied, she had been defied by her own troops. The
Britons had enlisted in the rebel armies, but they
had never attempted to assert anything like British
independence. And yet the tradition of independence
and liberty had always been kept alive. The Celtic
race is singularly tenacious of such ideas, and also
singularly skilful in concealing them from those who
are its masters for the time, and the Britons were
Celts of the purest blood. Caradoc<note place="foot">Commonly known by his Romanized name of Caractacus.</note> and Boadicea,
and other heroes and heroines of British independence,
were household words in many families which
were yet thoroughly Roman in spirit and manners.
Just as the Christianized Jews of Spain, though to
all appearances devout worshippers at church, still
clung in secret to the rites of their own worship, so
these loyal subjects of the Empire, as all the world
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>believed them, cherished in their hearts the memory
of the free Britain of the past and the hope of a free
Britain in the future. And the time was now at
hand when their leaders thought that this hope
might be fulfilled.
</p>

<p>
The Shanklin Chine of to-day is not a little
different from the Shanklin Chine of fifteen hundred
years ago. It has, so to speak, been subdued and
civilized. Now it is a very pretty and pleasant wood;
then it was an almost impenetrable thicket, a noted
lair of elk and wild boar. Inaccessible, however, as
it seemed to any one who surveyed it from above,
there was for those who were in the secret a way of
approaching its recesses. A little path, the beginning
of which it was almost impossible to discover without
a guide, led up from the sea-end of the ravine to a
hut which had been constructed about half way up
the ascent. It consisted of a single chamber, about
fourteen feet long, ten broad, and not more than
seven in height, and was constructed of roughly-hewn
logs, the interstices of which were filled with
clay. The walls, however, were not visible, for they
were covered with hangings of a dark blue material,
something like serge. The floor was strewn with
rushes. In the centre of the apartment there was a
hearth, having over it an aperture in the roof, not,
however, opening directly into the outer air, by which
the smoke might escape. On this hearth two or
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>three logs were smouldering with a dull heat which
it would have been easy to fan into flame. There
were two windows unglazed, but closed with rough
wooden lattices.
</p>

<p>
On three settles, roughly but strongly made of
oak, which, with a rudely-polished slab of wood that
served for table, constituted all the furniture of the
hut, sat three confederates, and behind each stood a
stalwart attendant armed with a wicker shield which
hung from his neck, and a long Gallic sword. The
three chiefs were curiously different in appearance.
One, as far, at least, as dress and manner were concerned,
might have passed anywhere for a genuine
Roman. He was taller, it is true, than the Romans
commonly were; and his complexion, though dark
rather than fair, had a ruddier hue than was often
seen under the more glowing skin of Italy; still he
might have walked down the Sacred Way or the
Saburra<note place="foot">Streets of Rome.</note> unnoticed save as an exceptionally handsome
man, of that fair beauty which the southern
nations especially admire. His hair was carefully
curled and perfumed; his face as carefully shaven,
and showing no trace of beard, moustache, or
whisker. His <anchor id="corr111"/><corr sic="oga">toga</corr> of brilliant white, his long-sleeved
tunic of some dark purple stuff, his elegant
sandals, were all such as a dandy of the Palatine
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>might have worn. The one thing which would have
been singular in a Roman street was the under-garment
reaching to his knees, which he had
assumed in consideration of the cold and wet of the
insular climate. His fingers were loaded with rings,
one of them a sapphire of unusual size, on which
was engraved a likeness of the feeble features of the
Emperor Honorius; on his left wrist might be seen
a bracelet of gold.
</p>

<p>
If Martianus—for that was the name of the personage
whom we have been describing—might have
been easily mistaken for a Roman, the chief who sat
facing him on the opposite side of the hearth was as
manifestly a Briton. His hair fell over his shoulders
in long natural curls which suggested no suspicion
of the barber’s or the perfumer’s art. His upper lip
was covered with a moustache which drooped to his
chin. His body was covered with a sleeveless coat
skilfully made of otters’ skins. Both arms were
bare, and were plentifully painted with woad. On his
legs he wore a garment something like the <q>trews</q>
or short trowsers which the Highland regiments sometimes
wear in lieu of the kilt; his feet were enveloped
in rude boots of hide which were laced round his
ankles. His ornaments were a massive chain of
twisted gold, which he wore round his neck, and a
single ring, rudely wrought of British gold, in which
was set a British pearl of immense size but indifferent
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>hue. He had a Roman name, as he could on occasion
wear Roman costume, and speak the Latin
tongue. In the present company he was known and
addressed by his native name of Ambiorix.
</p>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: British Conspirators.]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><anchor id="fig112"/><figure url="images/i_133.jpg" rend="w100"><index index="fig" level1="British Conspirators"/>
<head><hi rend='smallcaps'>British Conspirators.</hi></head>
<figDesc>British Conspirators</figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<p>
The third conspirator had the appearance of a
middle-class provincial. He wore the tunic that
formed part of a Roman’s ordinary dress, but not the
toga, which was replaced by a garment somewhat
resembling a short cloak. But under the garb of a
well-to-do townsman was concealed a very remarkable
career and character. Carausius—for this was
the name by which he was generally known—was one
of the last representatives of the ancient Druid priesthood.
The glory and power of this remarkable caste,
which had once held itself superior to the kings of
Britain, were departed. Indeed, it was almost
dangerous to hold the ancient faith, and practise the
ancient worship. Since the publication of the edict
by which Constantine had made Christianity the
Imperial religion, the adherents of the old religion
had become fewer and feebler. Some of the chiefs
and nobles still held it in secret, or were, at least,
ready to return to it, if it should ever again become
powerful; but its adherents were mostly to be found
among the poorer classes. Even these in the towns
were, in name at least, mostly Christians; it was
only the dwellers in the remoter and wilder parts of
the country that remained faithful. But these
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>scattered adherents revered the name of Carausius,
who was believed to possess all the wisdom of his
class, and was indeed credited with mysterious
powers over nature and the gift of prophecy. From
the Roman population all this was a secret, and the
secret was remarkably well kept. Carausius was
supposed to be nothing more than an ordinary
farmer. His Roman neighbours would have been
astonished in the last degree if they could have seen
him presiding at one of the Druid ceremonies, in his
white robes curiously embroidered with mystic
figures, his chaplet of golden oak-leaves, and the
headless spear, which was to him what the crozier
was to a Christian bishop.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="11" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XI. The Priest’s Demand"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XI. The Priest's Demand"/>
<head>CHAPTER XI.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">THE PRIEST’S DEMAND.</hi></head>

<p>
<q>So the time has come at last,</q> said Ambiorix;
<q>at last the yoke is broken from off the neck of
Britain. Blessed be the day that saw the legions of
the oppressor depart!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes,</q> replied Martianus, <q>but will they not
return? They have gone before; but have they not
come back? I take it these Romans get too much
out of us to let us go willingly.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have no fear of their return. If Honorius can
make terms with this Constantine and his army, he
will never send them back here; he wants them too
much at home. He has got King Alaric to reckon
with, and he has been long since drawing every
soldier that he can from the provinces into Italy.
No, depend upon it, at last Britain is <anchor id="corr115"/><corr sic="(quote mark missing)">free.</corr></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Free; yes, if it has not forgotten how to move.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>We haven’t all learnt to play the slave,</q> said
Ambiorix fiercely, as he started from his seat.
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/><q>There are some who have not sold their birthright
for the delights of the bath and the banquet, and who
are too proud to ape the manners of their masters.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Peace, my son,</q> interposed the aged priest;
<q>Martianus is not the less able to help the cause of
our country because he seems to be the friend of
those who oppress it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>These are but the wild words of youth, father,</q>
said Martianus. <q>By a wise man they are forgotten
as soon as they are heard. But let us hear what
Ambiorix has to tell us about the force which we
can bring into the field.</q>
</p>

<p>
The young chief entered into details which it is
impossible to reproduce. Preparations had been
made over nearly the whole of Britain, though the
more northerly parts, owing to the perpetual attacks
of their neighbours the Picts, had little to contribute
in the way of help. Ambiorix knew how many men
could be relied upon in every district; he was acquainted
with the disposition of the representatives
of the chief British families; he knew what each
would want for himself, to whom he would be prepared
to yield precedence, from whom he would
claim precedence for himself. All his views and
calculations were those of a sanguine temper; but
he certainly could show—on paper at least, as we
should say—a very respectable amount of strength.
When he had finished his account of the resources
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>of Britain, Martianus, who, whatever his faults, had
at least a genuine admiration for ability, held out his
hand—
</p>

<p>
<q>This is wonderful!</q> he said. <q>You have
a true genius for rule. That you should keep the
threads of so complicated a business all so distinct
is simply wonderful. You certainly give me hopes
that I never had before.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I never doubted for a moment,</q> returned the
young man, <q>but that when this Roman incubus
was removed all would go well. Besides, who is
there to attack us? We have no enemies.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No enemies!</q> replied the other, in a tone of
surprise. <q>Do you forget the Saxons by sea and the
Picts by land.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I believe that neither will trouble us. They are
not our enemies, but the enemies of Rome. They
have harassed—they were quite right in harassing—the
oppressors of the world: they will respect, I am
sure, the liberties of a free people. When Britain
is as independent as they are we shall be friends.</q>
</p>

<p>
Martianus could not help smiling sarcastically.
<q>That is very fine. One would think that you had
been a pupil in one of the schools of rhetoric which
you so much despise. The most famous of our
declaimers could not have put it better. But I am
afraid that there will be some difficulty in explaining
all this to them.</q>
</p>

<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>

<p>
<q>In any case, we can defend ourselves,</q> returned
the young chief, <q>though I do not think that the
need will occur.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Let us hope not,</q> said Martianus, but his tone
was not confident or cheerful.
</p>

<p>
There were, it may easily be supposed, not a few
other subjects for discussion, and the conversation
lasted for a long time, the young chief showing
throughout such a mastery of details as greatly
impressed his companions. When he had finished
a brief silence followed. It was broken by the
priest. There was a special solemnity in his tone,
which seemed to claim an authority for his utterances,
quite different from the position that he had taken
up while politics or military matters were being discussed.
</p>

<p>
<q>My children,</q> he said, <q>this is a grave matter.
The weal or woe of Britain for many generations is
at stake. If we fail, we may well be undone for
ever. You cannot enter on so great an enterprise
without the favour of the gods, and the favour of the
gods is not easily to be won. For many years they
have lacked the sacrifice which they most prize. I
myself, though I have completed my threescore years
and ten, have but once only been privileged so to
honour them. The time has come for this sacrifice
to be offered once more. Have I your consent, my
children? But indeed I need not ask. This is a
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>matter in which I cannot be mistaken, and from
which I cannot go back.</q>
</p>

<p>
The young chief nodded assent, but said nothing.
He was evidently disturbed.
</p>

<p>
<q>What do you mean, father?</q> he said.
</p>

<p>
<q>The sacrifice which the gods most prize,</q> answered
the old man, <q>is also that which is most
prized by men. The most perfect offering which we
can present to them is the most perfect creature they
themselves have made. Sheep and oxen may suffice
for common needs; but at such a time as this, when
Britain itself is at stake, we must appease the gods
with the blood of <hi rend='smallcaps'>Man</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Martianus grew pale. <q>It is not possible,</q> he
stammered.
</p>

<p>
<q>Not only possible, but necessary,</q> calmly returned
the priest. <q>Our fathers were commonly content
to offer those who had offended against the
laws; but in times of special necessity they chose
the noblest victims. Even our kings have given up
their sons and their daughters. So it must be now.</q>
</p>

<p>
All this was absolutely horrible to Martianus.
He did not believe indeed in Christianity, but it
had influenced him as it had influenced all the world.
Whether he was at heart much the better may be
doubted. But he was softer, more refined; he shrank
from visible horrors, from open cruelty—though he
could be cruelly selfish on occasion—and from blood<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>shed, though he would not stretch out a finger to save
a neighbour’s life. And what the priest said was as
new and unexpected to him as it was hideous. He
had no idea that this savage faith had survived in
Britain.
</p>

<p>
<q>Father,</q> he said, <q>such a thing would ruin us.
Such a deed would raise the whole country against
us. A human sacrifice! It is monstrous!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You are right so far,</q> returned the priest, <q>the
country must not know it. Britain is utterly corrupted
by this new faith, a superstition fit only for
women, and children, and slaves; and I don’t doubt
but that it would lift up its hands in horror at this
holy solemnity. But there is no need that it should
know it. It must be done secretly—so much I
concede.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And the victim?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, the days are passed when a Druid could lay
his command on Britain’s noblest, and be obeyed
without a murmur. The victim must be taken by
force, and secretly.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And have you any such victim in your thoughts?</q>
</p>

<p>
The priest hesitated for a moment; but it was
only for a moment. He resumed in a low voice,
which it evidently cost him an effort to keep steady—
</p>

<p>
<q>I have not forgotten the necessity of a choice;
indeed for months past it has been without ceasing
in my mind, and now the choice is made. The victim
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>whom the gods should have is a maiden, beautiful
and pure. She is of noble descent, though her father
was compelled, by poverty and the oppression of the
Roman tyrants, to follow a humble occupation.
Thus she is worthy to be offered. And yet no true
Briton will regret her fate, for she has deserted the
faith of her ancestors for the base superstition of the
Cross.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And her name, father?</q> said both of the conspirators
together.
</p>

<p>
Again the priest hesitated; a close observer might
even have seen a trace of agitation in that stern
countenance.
</p>

<p>
<q>It is Carna,</q> he said, after a pause, which raised
the suspense of his hearers almost to agony. <q>It is
Carna, adopted daughter of Count Ælius.</q>
</p>

<p>
And he looked steadfastly at his companions’ faces,
as if he would have said, <q>I dare you to challenge
my decision.</q>
</p>

<p>
The two started simultaneously to their feet. Not
long before, young Ambiorix, who was then not yet
possessed by the fanatical patriotism which now
mastered him, had admired her beauty and sweetness
of manner, and had had day-dreams of her as
the goddess of his own hearth. Then a stronger love
had come in the place of the old. It was not of
woman, but of Britain free among the nations, as
she had been before the restless eagles of the South
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>had found her, that he thought day and night.
Still, he could not calmly hear her doomed to a
horrible death, and for a moment he was ready to
rebel against the sentence of the priest.
</p>

<p>
The older man was terribly agitated. He had
been for many years on the friendliest footing with
the Count, a frequent guest at his table, almost an
intimate of the house. And Carna was an especial
favourite with him. Her sweetness, her simplicity,
and a pathetic resemblance that she bore to a dead
daughter of his own, touched him on the best side of
his nature.
</p>

<p>
<q>Priest,</q> he thundered, <q>it shall not be. I would
sooner the whole scheme came to ruin; I would
sooner die. A curse on your hideous worship!</q>
</p>

<p>
The priest had now crushed down the risings of
human feelings which his training had not sufficed
to eradicate.
</p>

<p>
<q>You have sworn by the gods,</q> he said, <q>and you
cannot go back. If you do not hesitate to betray
Britain, at least you will not dare to betray yourself.
You know the power I can command. Go back from
your promise to follow my leading, and you are a
dead man. You are faithful?</q> he went on, turning
to Ambiorix. <q>You do not draw back?</q>
</p>

<p>
The young chief returned a muttered assent.
</p>

<p>
The older man, meanwhile, was in a miserable condition
of indecision and terror. Unbeliever as he was,
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>having long since given up the faith of his fathers,
and never accepted the doctrine of the church but with
the emptiest formality, he had not put from his breast
the superstitious fear that commonly lingers when
belief is gone. And he knew that the priest’s
threatened vengeance on himself was no empty boast.
The strength of Druidism had passed, but it still had
fanatics at its command, whose daggers would find
their way sooner or later to his heart. The cold,
cynical look with which he had entered on the
conference had given place to mingled looks of rage,
remorse, and fear.
</p>

<p>
<q>You must have your own way,</q> he muttered,
sullenly.
</p>

<p>
<q>My son,</q> said the priest, in a tone which he
made studiously cautious, <q>what is one life in comparison
with the happiness and glory of our nation?
You, I know, would shrink from no sacrifice, and,
believe me,</q> he added in a lower voice, for he had to
play off the two rivals against each other, <q>believe
me, whatever sacrifice you make shall not miss its
reward.</q>
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="12" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XII. Lost"/><index index="pdf" level1="XII. Lost"/>
<head>CHAPTER XII.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">LOST.</hi></head>

<p>
Carna was known all over the neighbourhood of the
villa as the best and kindest of nurses, always ready
to help in cases of sickness, and able to command
the services of the household physician where
her own medical skill was at fault. It was therefore
with no surprise that the morning after the consultation,
recorded in the last chapter, she was told
that her help was wanted in a case of urgent need.
The woman who had brought the message was a
stranger. She was the daughter, she said, of an old
woman living at Uricum, a small hamlet about four
miles from the villa. She had happened to come the
day before on a visit to her mother, and found her
very ill; they had no medicines in the house, and
indeed should not have known how to use them if
they had. Would the lady come, and, if she thought
proper, bring the physician with her? The place
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>mentioned was on the limits of the district with
which Carna was acquainted. It could only be
approached by a path through the forest; and the
girl had not visited it more than two or three times
in her life. She had a vague remembrance, however,
of the patient’s name. On sending for the
physician, it was found that he was out, having been
called away, Carna was told, to a case which, he had
said before starting, would probably occupy him for
the greater part of the day. On hearing this, she
made up her mind to start without waiting for him.
The illness was very probably of a simple kind,
though it might be violent in degree. Very likely it
was a case in which the nurse would be more wanted
than the doctor. She provided herself with two or
three simple remedies which she learnt to employ in
the ordinary maladies of the country, of which
feverish colds were the most common, and started,
taking with her as companion and protector a stately
Milesian dog, or mastiff, who was always delighted
to play the part of a guard in her country walks.
Her own pet dog, a long-haired little creature, something
of the Spanish kind, whom she had intended
to leave at home, contrived to free himself from
the custody to which he had been assigned, and
stealthily followed her, cunningly keeping out of
sight till the party had gone too far for him to be
conveniently sent back. He then showed himself
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>with extravagant gestures of contrition, was tenderly
reproached, pardoned, and allowed to go on.
</p>

<p>
During the walk the messenger was curiously
silent, and answered all Carna’s questions about
her mother and her affairs in the very briefest fashion.
All that could be got from her was that she lived on
the main land, about twenty miles inland, in a
northerly direction, and that since her marriage, now
twenty years ago, she had seen very little of her
mother. When they reached the outskirts of the
hamlet she pointed out her mother’s house, and,
making an excuse that she had an errand for a neighbour,
disappeared. Carna, seeing nothing but a
certain surliness of temper, possibly only shyness,
in her companion, went on without suspicion. She
reached the house, and knocked at the door. There
was no answer. She knocked again. Still all was
silence. Looking a little more closely at the place
she could see no signs of habitation, no smoke, for
instance, making its way out of the thatch (for
chimneys did not yet exist, at least, in the poorer
dwellings). The next thing was to peep in at the
window, a wooden lattice, which had been left
partially open. The room into which she looked
was perfectly bare.
</p>

<p>
A suspicion rushed into her mind that she had
been tricked, and that danger of some unknown kind
was at hand. The strange sympathy which often
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>makes the dog so quick to understand the feelings of
man, made the big mastiff, Malcho, uneasy. With
a low growl, showing uneasiness rather than fear or
anger, he ranged himself at her side.
</p>

<p>
As she stood considering what was next to be done,
a party of six men, one of whom led a horse, issued
from the wood which bordered the little garden of
the cottage.
</p>

<p>
<q>Can you tell me where I shall find one Utta, who,
I am told, is sick, and wishful to see me? Can it be
that I have mistaken the house?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Utta, my lady,</q> said one of the party, <q>is not
to be found any more. She died a week since.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But,</q> said Carna, with rising anger, <q>a woman,
who said that she was her daughter, told me, not
more than two hours ago, that she was sick, and
desired to see me. Why have I been brought here
for nothing?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Pardon me, lady,</q> returned the first speaker, in
a tone in which respect and command were curiously
blended, <q>but you have not been brought for nothing.
You have a better work to do than ministering to a
sick old woman.</q>
</p>

<p>
As he spoke he moved forwards. But he had not
taken two steps before the great dog, who had been
watching the speakers, we might say almost listening
to their talk with the most eager attention, sprang
furiously at him, and laid him prostrate on the ground.
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>His companions rushed to rescue their leader from
the dog and to seize the girl. They did not accomplish
either of their objects with impunity. The
gallant creature turned from one assailant to
another with a strength and a fury which made him
a most formidable antagonist, and he had inflicted
some frightful wounds before he was made senseless
by repeated blows from the weapons of the assailants.
Nor was Carna overpowered without a struggle.
Weapons she had none, except a little dagger, meant
for use in needlework, which hung at her side; but
she used this not without effect. She clenched her
fist, and dealt two or three blows, of which her
antagonists bore the marks upon their faces for days
to come. Finally she wrenched herself from the
grasp of the assailants as a last resource, and endeavoured
to fly, but it was a hopeless effort. Before
she had run more than a few yards she was overtaken.
Her captors used no more violence than they could
help. Probably had they been less unwilling to hurt
her, she could not have resisted so long. Finding
her so strong and so determined, they were obliged
to bind her hands and feet; but they did this with all
the gentleness compatible with an evident resolve to
make her bonds secure. In the midst of her terror and
distress Carna could not help observing with astonishment
that the cords which they used were of silk.
Then finding herself absolutely helpless, she said—
</p>

<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>

<p>
<q>Do not bind me as though I were a slave. On
the faith of a Christian, I will not attempt to
escape.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Lady, we trust you,</q> said the leader of the party,
and at the same time directed one of his companions
to unbind the ropes. <q>Be comforted,</q> he went on;
<q>we do not intend you harm; on the contrary, high
honour is in store for you.</q>
</p>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: The Capture of Carna.]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><anchor id="fig128"/><figure url="images/i_151.jpg" rend="w100"><index index="fig" level1="The Capture of Carna"/>
<head><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Capture of Carna.</hi></head>
<figDesc>The Capture of Carna</figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<p>
Carna was scarcely reassured by these mysterious
words, but she had now recovered her calmness.
Summoning up all her courage—and it was far
beyond even the average of a singularly fearless race—she
intimated to her captors that she was ready to
follow them without further delay. They mounted
her upon the horse, which, as has been said, one of
them was holding, and started in a northerly direction.
Two of the party had been so severely injured by
the hound, that they were obliged to stay behind.
One of the others held the bridle of the horse, and
led him forward at an ambling pace; the others
followed behind.
</p>

<p>
The way of the party lay entirely along rough
forest-paths which seemed from their appearance,
often grown over as they were with branches and
creepers, to be but seldom traversed. Night had
fallen some hours before they reached the northern
coast of the island. Their way had lain in a north-westerly
direction, and they emerged near to the
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>arm of the sea now known as Fishbourne Creek.
Here they found a rowing boat in waiting.
</p>

<p>
Carna’s captors now handed over their charge to
the boat party, which was under the command of the
young chief whom we know by the name of Ambiorix.
He received his prisoner with a dignified civility,
made her as comfortable as he could with rugs and
wraps in the stern of the boat, and then gave orders
to start. The journey across the channel, which
we now know as the Solent, occupied some hours,
though the night was calm, and the ebbing tide
mostly in the rowers’ favour, the shortest route not
being taken, but a north-westerly direction still followed.
The morning was just beginning to break
when the coast was reached near the spot where
Lymington now stands. The party hurriedly disembarked,
put the girl on a rough litter which they
had with them in the boat, and carried her to a dwelling
some half-mile inland, and surrounded by the
woods which here almost touched high-water mark.
Carna found a tolerable chamber allotted to her,
where she was waited upon by an elderly woman
who seemed bent on doing everything that she could
for her comfort. The girl was of the elastic temper
which soon recovers itself even under the most
depressing circumstances. She had the wisdom, too,
to feel that, if she was to help herself, she must keep
up her strength to the very best of her power. She
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>did not refuse the simple but well-cooked meal
which her attendant served to her, after she had
enjoyed the refreshment of a bath. And then overpowered
by the fatigue of a journey which had lasted
not much less than twenty-four hours, she sank into
a deep sleep.
</p>

<p>
It was dark when her attendant gently roused her
and told her that in an hour she would be required
to resume her journey, in which, as Carna heard
with some pleasure, she was herself to be her companion.
A start was made about three hours before
midnight, and the journey was continued till an
hour before dawn. This plan was followed till their
destination was reached. The party was evidently
careful to keep its movements secret. Their way
lay as before, by woodland paths, leading them
through the district now known as the New Forest.
They travelled but slowly, more slowly indeed than
they had done on the island, for the paths were still
rougher, and, in fact, almost undistinguishable.
Carna, too, was the only one of the company that
had a horse, and her female attendant, who was
neither young nor active, could manage but a few
miles at a time. It was the morning of the second
day after they had left the coast before they reached
the edge of the great forest known as the Natanleah.
Some five miles to the west lay Sorbiodunum, now
Salisbury. This was a Roman town of some
impor<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>tance, and had of course to be avoided by the party,
who, indeed, were anxious, as Carna could gather
from a few scattered words that were let drop in her
presence, as to the way in which the rest of their
journey was to be accomplished. The country was
open, cultivated, and comparatively populous, the
inhabitants being, for the most part, thoroughly
Latinized. Two Roman roads, too, had to be crossed
before their destination was reached.
</p>

<p>
The day was spent as usual in concealment and
repose. An hour after nightfall the party started.
They had now managed to procure another horse for
Carna’s attendant; and as the ground was fairly
level, unenclosed, and, at that time of year, unencumbered
by crops, they moved rapidly onwards.
The moon had now risen, and Carna, for the first
time, could at least see where they were going. She
was still, however, at a loss to know what part of
the country they had reached. At midnight a halt
was called, and the leader of the party proceeded to
blindfold the captive’s eyes. But if he wanted to
keep her in ignorance of the locality, he was a little
too late. The girl’s quick sight had caught a glimpse
in the distance of the huge circle of earth walls, now
known as Amesbury. She had never seen the place,
but it was known to her in the chronicles of her
people. There, as she had read with a patriotism
which all her Roman surroundings had not been
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>able to quench, her countrymen had more than once
held at bay the legions of Rome. She knew roughly
the situation of the famous camp of the Belgæ, and
she was sure that these massive fortifications, just
seen for a moment in the moonlight, could be none
others than those of which she had read so often.
</p>

<p>
When the bandage was removed, she found herself
in a chamber larger and more comfortably
furnished than any she had hitherto occupied on her
journey. Part of the palace of one of the old kings
of the Belgæ was still standing, and the travellers
had taken up their quarters in it. The Amesbury
camp was indeed as safe a place as they could have
chosen. It was a spot which no Roman, much less
a Briton living under Roman protection, would care
to visit. The whole countryside believed that it
was haunted by the spirits of the great chiefs and
warriors who had been buried within its precincts,
and of the slaves who had been killed to furnish
them with service and attendance in the unseen
world. The scanty remnant who still clung to the
Druid faith found their account in encouraging these
superstitions. More than one appearance had been
arranged to terrify sceptical or curious persons who
had been rash enough to visit the vast circle of
embankments. For many years before the time of
our story the enclosure had been untrodden except
by the few who were in the secret of the Druid
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>initiation. Here, then, the party waited securely
with their prisoner till the time should come for the
solemn visit to <hi rend='italic'>Choir Gawr</hi>, the Great Temple,
known to us by the name of Stonehenge.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="13" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XIII. What Does it Mean?"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XIII. What Does it Mean?"/>
<head>CHAPTER XIII.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">WHAT DOES IT MEAN?</hi></head>

<p>
It was some time before the prolonged absence of
Carna caused any alarm at the villa. When she
was on one of her errands of kindness among the
sick, it was difficult to say when she would return.
But in the course of the afternoon the old physician
returned, not a little wrath that he had been sent on
a fool’s errand. He had been told that an old farmer,
living close to the north-west of the island some
seven or eight miles from the villa was lying dangerously
ill, and he had found the supposed patient in
vigorous health, and not a little angry at being
supposed to be anything else. This seemed to make
things look somewhat serious. It was easy to guess
that the trick played upon the physician had something
to do with the message brought to Carna. It
was remembered that the stranger had asked that
he should accompany the girl; it was at least
possible that she knew him to be out of the way,
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>and that she would not have made the request had
she not known it.
</p>

<p>
While the Count, who had just returned from an
inspection of his crews, was talking the matter over
with his daughter and two of his officers who
happened to be present, a new cause for suspicion
and alarm presented itself. Carna’s pet dog had
found its way back with a bit of broken cord round
its neck, and refused to be comforted, tearing and
pulling at the dresses of the attendant, and saying,
as plainly as a dog could say it, that there was
something wrong, that it must be attended to at
once, and that he would show them how to do it, if
they would only follow him. When the rope round
his neck was examined more closely, it was found
that it had been gnawed in two. <q>He has been
tied up and has broken away,</q> said the Count, when
this was pointed out to him. <q>And if I know the
dear little thing,</q> broke in Ælia, <q>he would not
have left his mistress as long as he could be near
her. I am sure that some mischief has happened to
her.</q> And this was the general impression, though,
who could have ventured on so audacious an outrage
it was impossible to guess.
</p>

<p>
What had happened, as the reader may possibly
guess, was this. The dog had remained with Carna,
showing his love, not by fierce resistance like that
made by his powerful companion, for which he had
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>the sagacity to know he had not sufficient strength,
but by keeping as close to her as he could. After
she had been made a prisoner, and while the party
were preparing for a start, he had been tied to a tree.
It had been intended that he should go with his
mistress, for whom, as has been said, her captors
showed throughout a certain consideration, but it so
happened that in the bustle of departure he was
forgotten. When he saw her go and found himself
left behind, he set himself with all his might to gnaw
the rope which fastened him to the tree. This task
took him a long time, for he was an old dog, and his
teeth were not as good as they had been. Finding
himself free he started in headlong pursuit, easily
tracking the party by the scent, but after a while he
halted; a happy thought—is it possible that, in the
teeth of all accumulated evidences, any one can
deny that dogs can think?—a happy <hi rend='italic'>thought</hi> then
struck his mind, quickened to its utmost capacity
of intelligence by love and grief. We may translate
it into human language thus: <q>If I follow her and
overtake her, what good can I do? but if I go back
and make the people at home understand that something
has happened to her, then I can help her to
some purpose.</q> This was his conclusion, anyhow.
How he arrived at it only He knows who makes all
things great and small, and <q>divideth to all severally
as He will.</q> He turned back, ran with breathless
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>speed to the villa, and did all that could be done,
short of speaking, to show that his dear mistress was
in trouble.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile, however, much time had been lost,
and the day was already far advanced. Anxious as
was the Count to set out, he could not but perceive
that haste might defeat the object of his journey.
To start when the light was failing would probably
be to miss important signs of what had happened,
and, very possibly, to risk success. All preparations,
however, were made. The men who were to form
the pursuing party were chosen. As it may be
supposed, there was no lack of volunteers. There
was not a single being at the villa or its dependencies
that would not have given a great deal and borne a
great deal to see Carna again in safety. But it
would be possible to take only a small number, if the
pursuit was to be rapid and effective. Some of the
most active of the crews of the war-ships accordingly
were chosen, sailors having then as now a
cheerful activity that makes them particularly valuable
members of a land expedition. The Count added
others from his own establishment, and he determined
to conduct the party himself. It was arranged
that it should start the following day, as soon as it
should be sufficiently light.
</p>

<p>
One of the slaves who was early astir on the
following morning found fixed to an outside gate of
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>the villa a document, rudely written and roughly
folded, which bore the Count’s address. It was
found, when opened, to contain the following message,
expressed in ungrammatical Latin, mingled with
one or two British words:
</p>

<p rend="margin-top: 2; margin-bottom: 2">
<q><hi rend="italic">She whom you seek is not far off, and may be recovered
by you if you are wise. If you attempt to regain
her by force, she will be lost to you altogether. But if
you wish to have her again with you safely and without
trouble, send one whom you can trust with a hundred
gold pieces at midnight three days after the receiving of
this letter to the place to which she was yesterday fetched.
Let your messenger go alone, and ask no questions then
or afterwards.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>So she is held to ransom by a set of brigands,</q>
cried the Count, when he had read this document.
<q>I should not have thought that such a thing had
been possible in Britain. But the times have been
getting worse and worse. We have long been
weakening our hold upon the province, and we had
better clear out altogether, if we cannot do better
than this. But I suppose we have no choice. We
must not endanger the dear girl’s life. But now the
question is about the money. I do not think that I
have so much in gold in the house; but we can
borrow somewhere what is <anchor id="corr139"/><corr sic="(quote mark missing)">wanted.</corr></q>
</p>

<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>

<p>
<q>Perhaps,</q> said the Count’s secretary, whom he
had summoned to consult with him, <q>the peddler
can help you. He has the reputation of being richer
than he looks.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well,</q> replied the Count, <q>that would be a
simple way out of the difficulty, if it can be
managed. Meanwhile, let me see what I have got
of my own at hand.</q>
</p>

<p>
It was found that eighty gold pieces were forthcoming,
and the peddler was summoned and asked
whether he could make up the balance.
</p>

<p>
<q>My Lord,</q> said the man when he was brought
into the Count’s presence and had heard the story,
<q>I will make no idle pretence of poverty. I have
what you want, and it is entirely at your lordship’s
service. But will you let me see the letter in which
this demand for ransom is made?</q>
</p>

<p>
The Count handed him the document, and he
examined it long and carefully.
</p>

<p>
<q>My lord,</q> he said, <q>the more I look at this, the
more I am confirmed in certain suspicions which
have been growing up in my mind. I have been
thinking of this matter, and of other matters which
seem to me to be connected with it all the night. It
will take long to explain, and, of course, after all I
may be wrong; still, I think you would do well to
hear what I have got to say.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Count, who had previously had reasons for
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>thinking well of the peddler’s intelligence, bade him
proceed.
</p>

<p>
<q>In the first place,</q> continued the man, <q>I think
this letter is a blind. It is made to look like the
work of some very rude and ignorant person. But
the pretence is not well kept up. You will see, if
you look at the handwriting a little more closely,
that it is feigned. The writer was perfectly able to
make it a great deal better than it is, if he had so
chosen, and he has sometimes forgotten his part.
Some of the letters, some even of the words, particularly
of the small words, about which he would
naturally be less careful, are quite well-formed.
Now a really bad writer, I mean one who writes
badly because he does not know how to write
well, is always bad; every letter he forms is misshapen.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Count examined the document and acknowledged
that this comment upon it was just. And he
began to see too what was naturally more apparent
to him, as an educated man, than it was to the
peddler, that the style was hardly what would have
been expected from an ignorant scribe.
</p>

<p>
<q>What, then, is your conclusion?</q> he asked.
</p>

<p>
<q>About that,</q> returned the other, <q>I am not so
certain. That this is a blind, as I said, I am sure;
and this talk about the ransom consequently is a
deception. <q>Three days,</q> you see it says. That
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>would be three days lost. No, my lord, it is not by
robbers that this has been planned.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What then?</q> cried the Count, flushing a fiery
red as a sudden thought occurred to him. <q>Carna
is very beautiful. Do you think——</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No,</q> said the peddler, <q>I think not. A lover
would not lay so elaborate a plot as I fancy I can
see here. I think the Lady Carna is a hostage,
or——</q>
</p>

<p>
He paused, and continued after a few minutes of
silence. <q>I have much to piece together, and it
would take long, and lose much precious time. That
is the last thing that we should do. They have got
too much start already. We must not let them
improve it more than we can help. You will let me
go with you, and I shall have leisure to put all I
have got to say together without hindering you.
But the sooner we are on their track the better.</q>
</p>

<p>
To this the Count readily agreed, and preparations
for immediate departure were made. It was with
difficulty that Ælia could be persuaded that she
must be left behind. But when it was pointed out
to her that her presence must inevitably make the
progress of the party more slow, and increase their
anxieties, she reluctantly gave way. At the last
moment an unexpected addition was made to the
party in the person of the Saxon prisoner.
</p>

<p>
<q>My lord,</q> said the peddler, to whom the young
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>man had communicated his earnest desire to be
allowed to go; <q>it may seem a strange thing for me
to say, but you cannot have a better helper in this
matter than this young fellow. He is as strong as
any horse, and as keen and intelligent a youth as I
ever saw. And in this case too his wits will be
doubly sharp, and his arm doubly strong, for he
worships the very ground that the Lady Carna treads
upon.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well,</q> replied the Count, with a smile, <q>let
him go. After all, it is quite as safe to take a lion
about with one, as to leave him at home.</q>
</p>

<p>
The pet dog was, of course, a valued member of
the expedition.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="14" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XIV. The Pursuit"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XIV. The Pursuit"/>
<head>CHAPTER XIV.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">THE PURSUIT.</hi></head>

<p>
The task of tracing the lost girl was at first easy
enough. She and the stranger, who, it now seemed,
had been sent to entrap her, had been seen proceeding
in the direction mentioned in the message. The
neighbourhood of the villa was mostly cultivated
ground, and there had been people at work in the
fields who had noticed the girl’s well-known figure.
Beyond this belt of cultivated country, which might
have been about a mile broad, there was only one
road which it was possible for her to have taken.
Following this, and reaching the hamlet at the
further end of which, as we have seen, the abduction
had taken place, they still found themselves on the
right track. A child had seen two people, one of
them, she said, a pretty lady, pass by on the morning
of the day before. The lady had smiled, and
said a few words to her in her own language, and
had given her a sweetmeat. Further on the traces
of what they were looking for became still more
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>evident. There were marks of struggle on the
ground, for Carna, as we have seen, had not suffered
herself to be taken without resistance; a button was
found on the ground, which the peddler at once
identified as one of his own selling. And a little off
the path, the tree was found to which the dog had
been tied, with the fragment of string still attached
to it. Curiously enough, no traces of the great dog
could be found.
</p>

<p>
Nor did the next step in the pursuit delay them long.
There were, it is true, three paths through the forest,
which closed in the hamlet on every side except that
by which the party had approached it. Carna’s pet
dog at once decided for the searchers which of the
three they should follow. He discovered the scent
very quickly, ran at the top of his speed along the
path thus distinguished from the others for about a
hundred yards, and then, coming back, implored the
party, so to speak, by his gestures, that they should
come with him. It was evident that the path had
been traversed by a party of considerable size, whose
tracks, the marks of a horse’s hoofs among them,
were still fresh in the ground, soft as it was with the
winter rains. The dog was evidently satisfied that
they were right, for he ran quietly on, now and then
giving a very soft little whine. It wanted still an
hour or so of sunset when the party emerged out of
the forest upon the shore.
</p>

<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>

<p>
Here it might have seemed at first all trace was
lost. The tide had flowed and ebbed twice since the
girl had been there, and had swept away all marks
of footsteps. The dog too was no longer a guide.
The poor little creature’s distress indeed was pitiful,
as he ran to and fro upon the shore with a plaintive
whine.
</p>

<p>
The Count asked his companions for their opinions.
</p>

<p>
<q>Have they taken to the wood again, do you
think? or have they crossed the water? they may
have gone a mile or more along the shore and then
entered the forest. In that case it seems hopeless
to recover the track.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It is my opinion,</q> said the peddler, <q>that they
have crossed to the mainland; but it is only an
opinion, and I have little or nothing to urge for it.</q>
</p>

<p>
Other members of the party had different views;
and, on the whole, opinion was adverse to the
peddler’s view; and the Count was about to order a
search in the direction of the wood further along the
shore, when the attention of the party was arrested
by a shout from the Saxon.
</p>

<p>
The discussion had been carried on in a language
which he had still some difficulty in understanding,
and he had been pacing backwards and forwards
along the shore, seemingly lost in thought, but really
watching everything with that keen attention to all
outward objects which is one of the characteristics
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>of uncivilized man. It was thus that something
caught his eye. He plunged his hand into one of
the little rock-pools upon the shore, and drew it out.
It was a small gold trinket, which the girl had
dropped in the forlorn hope that it might be found.
Its weight, for it was an almost solid piece of metal,
had kept it in the place where it fell, and as the
night and day had been uniformly calm, there had
been no sufficient movement of the water to disturb
it. With a cry of delight the Saxon held it up, and
the Count recognized it at once.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah!</q> said the peddler, <q>I knew the fellow would
be of use to us. If the Lady Carna is anywhere on
the earth he would find her. This proves, my lord,
that they have crossed the sea. They would certainly
have not come down so far from the shore as this.</q>
</p>

<p>
This seemed too probable to admit of any doubt.
Happily it had occurred to the Count that it would
be well to have some kind of vessel at his command,
and he had ordered a pinnace to start from the
haven as soon as it could be got ready, and to coast
along the shore of the island, watching for any signal
that might be given. The land party had outstripped
the ship, which, indeed, had not started till somewhat
later. Still, it might be expected very soon.
Meanwhile there was an opportunity for discussing
the aspect which the affair now bore.
</p>

<p>
After various opinions had been given, the Count
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>turned to the peddler. <q>And what do you think of
the affair?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have a notion,</q> the man replied, <q>but it may
be only a fancy—still I seem to myself to have a
notion of what their purpose is.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you mean,</q> pursued the Count, as the other
paused, and seemed almost unwilling to speak, <q>do
you mean that they think of holding her as a kind of
hostage against me? Do they fancy that I shall not
be able to act against them, and shall hinder my
colleagues from acting, as long as she is in their
power? or will they keep her as something to make
terms about if they fail?</q>
</p>

<p>
The other was still silent for a few minutes, and
seemed to be collecting his thoughts. At last he
said:
</p>

<p>
<q>My lord, what I am going to tell you may seem
as foolish as a dream. I should have gone on saying
nothing about it, as I have said nothing about it
hitherto, if things had not happened which makes it
a crime for me to be silent any longer. You find it
difficult to believe that a rebellion is possible among
a nation which you have always looked upon as
thoroughly subdued. But what will you say if I
tell you that this rebellion has been preparing for
generations, and that the Druids have been, and are,
at the bottom of it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Druids!</q> cried the Count, <q>I did not know
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>that there were any Druids. I thought that the last
of them had disappeared years ago.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Not so,</q> replied the peddler; <q>the people who
rule do not know what is going on about them. Now
I have been among this people the greater part of
my life. I have seen them, not as they show themselves
to you, but as they are. You think that they
are Christians—not very good Christians, perhaps,
but still not worse than other people—and believing
the Creeds, if they believe anything. Now I know
for a certainty that many of them are no more
Christians now than their fathers were three hundred
and fifty years ago. I have seen sometimes, when
no one knew that I saw, what they really worshipped.
I have pieced together many little things. I have
heard hints dropped unawares, and I know that
there is a secret society, which has existed ever since
the island was conquered, which has for its object
the bringing back of the old faith. I could name—if
things turn out as I expect they will, I will name—men
whom you believe to be quiet, respectable
citizens, but who are the heads of a conspiracy
reaching all over Britain, against Rome and the
Christian Church. You never see them except in
the tunic and the cap, but they can wear on occasion
the Druid’s robe and crown.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But tell me,</q> said the Count, with a certain impatience,
<q>what has this got to do with my
daughter?</q>
</p>

<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>

<p>
<q>This, my lord,</q> answered the other, <q>that if
the Druids are making the great effort for which
they have been preparing for no one knows how
many years, they will begin it with all the solemnity
that is possible—in a word, with the great sacrifice.
This, I suppose, has not been practised for many
generations, but it has not been forgotten. To speak
plainly, I believe that the Lady Carna has been
carried off for the victim.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Count staggered back as if he had been
struck. <q>Impossible!</q> he cried. <q>Such things
cannot be in Britain: and why should they fix upon
her?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>For two reasons,</q> said the peddler. <q>She is of
royal race. You very likely do not know or care
about such things. All Britons to you will be much
about the same; but they do not forget it. Yes,
though her father was nothing more than a sailor,
she is descended from Cassibelan. And then she is a
Christian. These are the two reasons why they
have chosen her—this is what they honour her for,
and this is what they hate her for.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But where,</q> cried the Count, <q>where is this
monstrous thing to be done?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>That,</q> replied the other, <q>I think I know. It
can hardly be done anywhere but at the Great Temple,
the Choir Gawr, as they call it themselves.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And where is this Great Temple?</q>
</p>

<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>

<p>
<q>About forty miles inland, in a nearly northerly
direction. I have seen the place once, and I can find
my way to it, I believe; but, to make sure, I will find
a guide.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And when?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>At the full moon. I should say.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And how much does it want to the full moon
now?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It will be full moon to-morrow night.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>We have to cross then to the mainland—and the
galley is not in sight—to find a guide, and to travel
forty miles, and all before to-morrow night. Well,
it must be done. To think of these wretches murdering
my dear Carna!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Do not fear, my lord; we shall do it,</q> said the
peddler; but added, in a low voice, <q>if nothing
happens.</q>
</p>

<p>
At that moment the galley came in sight. <q>That
is right,</q> cried the Count; <q>anyhow, we begin well;
no time will be lost in getting across.</q>
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="15" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XV. The Pursuit (continued)"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XV. The Pursuit (continued)"/>
<head>CHAPTER XV.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">THE PURSUIT (<hi rend='italic'>continued</hi>).</hi></head>

<p>
The signal previously agreed was promptly hoisted
by the party on shore, and as promptly observed and
obeyed by the crew of the galley which had been for
some time on the watch for some communication.
</p>

<p>
<q>My lord,</q> said the peddler, when they had embarked,
<q>if I may suggest, we should not make a
straight passage to the mainland from here, but steer
for the north-west. Some eight miles beyond the
western point of the island there is a river flowing
into the sea, and a fishing village at the mouth. I
know the place well, and have one or two good friends
there. We shall get a guide there; I have in my mind
the very man who will suit us well in that capacity.
Indeed the river<note place="foot">This river, of course, must have been the Avon.</note> itself would be no bad guide. The
Great Temple lies but a few miles westward from its
upper course. The road will be easy too along the
valley, which is mostly clear of wood.</q>
</p>

<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>

<p>
<q>Then,</q> said the Count, <q>the Temple cannot be
far from Sorbiodunum. Why not make for the Great
Harbour, and go by the Great Road to Venta<note place="foot">Winchester.</note> and
from Venta to Sorbiodunum.<note place="foot">Salisbury.</note> The travelling would
be much easier.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have thought of that,</q> said the other, <q>but I
think my plan the best. The distance is far less, and,
what is quite as important, we shall not be expected
to come that way. Depend upon it there will be an
ambuscade laid somewhere along the road; for they
will feel sure that we shall try and come that way.</q>
</p>

<p>
It was evident anyhow that as far as the sea voyage
was concerned the man was right. The tide was
ebbing slowly, and an east wind, already high and
still rising, was blowing. To make way against wind
and tide to the Great Harbour would be in any case
a laborious business; and if the wind increased to a
gale as it threatened to do, might become impossible.
The galley had been chosen for swiftness rather than
seaworthy qualities in rough weather, and might fail
in the attempt to work back. On the other hand
both wind and tide thoroughly favoured a westward
voyage.
</p>

<p>
Indeed she moved gaily on with a strong breeze,
that in the phraseology of to-day would be called a
half-gale, blowing due aft, and scarcely felt the heavy
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>sea, seeming to leave the waves behind, as the rowers
bent their backs to their work. The Saxon had now
taken his place on one of the thwarts, and his gigantic
strength, put it was evident with a will into the
labour, seemed of itself to drive the galley forwards.
In an incredibly short time the river mouth was
reached, the galley stranded, and the guide, who, by
great good luck, had just returned from a fishing
voyage, engaged.
</p>

<p>
But now an unforeseen obstacle opposed itself. A
few specks of rain had been felt by the party as they
went, and then as the day went on, began to change
to snow. And now the wind almost suddenly died
away, and at the same time the fall of snow grew
heavier. The face of the guide fell.
</p>

<p>
<q>My lord,</q> he said, <q>I hear that your business is
urgent and cannot wait. But I must tell you that
the weather looks very bad, and that the prospects of
our journey are almost as unfavourable as they can
be. We shall have a very heavy fall of snow, and if
the wind gets up again, and it begins to drift, we shall
be blocked, and possibly unable to get either backwards
or forwards.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>We must go,</q> said the Count, in a determined
voice, <q>though the snow were over our heads.</q>
</p>

<p>
After a very short interval allowed for refreshment,
the party started. At first the snow was no very
serious obstacle; but after a couple of hours
inces<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>sant and rapid fall, it began to make movement very
difficult. The progress of the travellers grew slower
and slower, and the Count began to calculate that at
their present rate of speed they could but barely arrive
in time. It was an immense relief when the sky
almost suddenly cleared, and showed the moon still
evidently somewhat short of the full. But the relief
was only temporary. The clearer weather was the
result of a change of wind, which had suddenly
veered to a point westward of north and which was
rapidly increasing in force. And now occurred the
thing which the peddler’s knowledge of the country
and the weather had suggested to him—the snow
began to drift. At first the party was hardly conscious
of the change; indeed for a time the way was
somewhat clearer and easier than before; then as
they came to a slight depression, the snow was felt
to be certainly deeper. Still three or four miles were
traversed without any particular difficulty. Then the
leader of the party suddenly plunged into a drift considerably
above his knees. This obstacle, however,
was surmounted, or rather avoided by making a
<foreign lang="fr" rend='italic'>détour</foreign>. But still the wind rose higher and higher,
and as it rose, not only did its force hinder the party’s
advance, but the drifts grew now formidably deep.
Some of the party began to lag behind; the Count
himself, who was past his prime, began to acknowledge
to himself, with an agony of anger and fear in
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>his heart, that his strength was failing. Still they
struggled on, leaving one or two of the strugglers to
make the best of their way back, or, it might well be,
to perish in the snow, till about half the distance was
traversed. They had now reached a little hamlet,<note place="foot">Now known as Downton, a small market town, about five
miles south of Salisbury.</note>
on the outskirts of which there happened to be a small
villa. It was shut up, the proprietor chancing to be
absent, but it was put at the disposal of the party by the
person who was in charge. Fires were hastily lighted,
and the travellers, most of whom had almost reached
the end of their powers of endurance, were refreshed
with warmth and food.
</p>

<p>
The Count held a council of war. The situation
indeed <anchor id="corr156"/><corr sic="eemed">seemed</corr> nothing less than desperate. Two out
of the party of twenty-five—their numbers had been
increased by a contingent taken from the crew of
the galley—were missing. They had fallen out on
the march, and it was too probable that they had
perished in the snow. Of the remainder but four or
five seemed fit for any further exertion. By far the
freshest and most vigorous of them was the Saxon.
The fatigues of the night had scarcely told on his
gigantic strength. The Italians, and even the Britons,
natives of the southern parts of the island, and little
accustomed to heavy falls of snow, looked at him
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>with astonishment. As for him, he was full of impatience
at the delay.
</p>

<p>
The Count was in an agony of doubt and distress.
His own strength had failed so completely that all
his spirit—and there was no braver man in the armies
of Rome—could not have dragged him a hundred
yards further. And he saw that many of his followers
were in little better case. And yet to give up the
pursuit! to leave Carna, the sweetest, gentlest of
women, dear to him as a daughter of his own, to this
hideous death! The thought was too dreadful.
</p>

<p>
<q>When do they perform their horrible rites?</q> said
the Count to the peddler.
</p>

<p>
<q>When the full moon shines through the great
south entrance of the Temple,</q> was the answer.
</p>

<p>
<q>And when will that be?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>To-night, and about an hour before midnight, as
far as I can guess.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And what must be done? What is your advice?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>There seems to me only one thing possible.
Those who can must press on. I count a <anchor id="corr157"/><corr sic="greal">great</corr> deal
on the Saxon. His strength and endurance are such
as I never saw in any man, and they now seem to be
increased manyfold. Anything that can be done by
mortal man, he, you may be sure, will do. Our guide
too has happily something still left in him; and there
are three or four others who are equal to going on
after they have had a little rest. I should say, let
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>them get two or three hours’ sleep, and then push on
to Sorbiodunum. That is not far from here, and they
can easily reach it before noon to-day, after allowing
a fair time for rest. Perhaps they may get some help
there, though the place is not what it was. It is
some years since I paid it a visit, and then I found it
in a very declining condition, so much so that it was
not worth my while to go there again. There were
not more than two or three Roman traders there, and
they made but a very poor living out of their
business.</q>
</p>

<p>
This seemed to be the best course practicable under
the circumstances. The Saxon, with whom the
peddler held a long conversation, was for pressing on
at once, and would almost have gone alone, but for
want of a guide. When he understood the state of
the case he yielded to what he perceived to be a
necessity, and throwing himself down on the hearth
was almost immediately buried in a profound sleep,
an example which was soon followed by the rest of
the party, the Count and the peddler excepted.
</p>

<p>
Not more than two hours could be allowed for rest.
The guide and the three sailors who had volunteered
to go on were roused with no little difficulty; the
young Saxon was wide awake in a moment. The
party partook hastily of a meal of bread, meat, and
hot wine and water, which the peddler had been busying
himself in preparing while they slept, and, after
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>stowing away some provisions for the day, started on
their journey about two hours before noon.
</p>

<p>
Sorbiodunum was reached without much difficulty.
But there a great disappointment awaited them.
The peddler’s anticipations were more than fulfilled,
for the town was almost deserted. Only one Roman
remained there. He was an old man who had
married a British wife, and who cultivated a farm
which had descended to her from her father. When
the guide handed to him the letter which the Count
had addressed to the authorities of the town, begging
for any help which they could give in saving the
liberty and life of a person very dear to himself, he
shook his head. When he heard the whole of the
guide’s story, he became still more depressed.
</p>

<p>
<q>Authorities!</q> he said, <q>there are no authorities.
I am the only Roman left in the place, and I do not
know where to look for a single man to help you.
As for the Great Temple on the plain there is not a
creature here who would dare to go near it. They
think it haunted by spirits and demons. And indeed
there <hi rend='italic'>are</hi> strange stories about it. To tell you the
plain truth, I should not much care to go there myself.
No; I see nothing to be done. But I will ask
my wife. Perhaps her woman’s wit will help us.</q>
</p>

<p>
Bidding the party be seated, he left the room in
which he had received them, and entered the kitchen,
where his wife was busy with her domestic affairs.
</p>

<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>

<p>
In about half an hour he returned. His expression
was now a shade more cheerful than before.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah!</q> he said, <q>I was right about the woman’s
wit. She <hi rend='italic'>has</hi> thought of something. You must know
that my wife is a very devout Christian—for myself I
am a Christian too, but I must own that I don’t see so
much in it as she does—and that she has brought up
our children in that way of thinking. Now, our eldest
son is a priest in a village some seven miles hence,
and his people are devoted to him. If there is any
one in this neighbourhood who can give you the help
you want it is he. He has only got to say the word
and his people will follow him to the end of the
world. Here is a proof of it. Four years ago a
strong party of Picts came this way, ravaging and
plundering wherever they went. There were not
more than fifty of them, but the people were as
terrified as if they were so many demons. If you
think this place a desert now, what would you have
thought it then? There was not a single person
left in it—at least a single person that could help
himself—for the cowards had the meanness to leave
some of the old and the sick behind them. But my
son was not going to let the robbers have it all their
own way—you know he has something of the Roman
in him—and he went about talking to his people in
such a way, that they plucked up spirit, and fell on
the Picts one night when they were expecting nothing
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>less than an attack, and gave such an account of
them, that the country has not been troubled since
with the like of them. Well, as I say, he is the
man to help you. I have my younger son here
working with me on the farm; he is just such
another as his elder brother, and would have been a
priest too if he had not felt it to be his duty to stay
and help me. I will bring him in, and he shall hear
the whole story and carry it to his brother. That is
the best hope that I can give you, and I really think
that it is worth something. What I can do for you
does not go beyond hospitality, but to that you are
heartily welcome. You have some hours before you.
If you start an hour after sunset you will be in ample
time. And, in fact, you had better not start before,
because the less that is seen of your movements the
better. I don’t know that any of the people about
here are infected with the Druid superstition, though
I have had one or two hints to that effect, hints
which what you have just told me helps to explain.
But, in any case, the more secret you are the better.
Besides, my son’s Party cannot reach the Great
Temple till long after dark. Meanwhile take some
rest and refreshment, for, believe me, you have
something before you.</q>
</p>

<p>
This advice was so obviously right, that the guide,
who was in command of the party, had no hesitation
in accepting it.
</p>

<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>

<p>
About six o’clock another start was made. At
first, though the weather looked threatening, no
serious obstacle presented itself. The snow was
somewhat deep on the ground, but there were no
serious drifts on their way, a way which, indeed, for
some distance from the town lay under the leeward
side of a wood. But they had not gone more than
a mile and a half when a disastrous change in their
circumstances occurred. The wind rose almost suddenly
to the height of a gale, and brought with it a
fall of snow, separated by the rapid movement of the
air into a very fine powder, and working its way
through the clothing of the traveller with a penetrating
power which nothing could resist. Still,
benumbed as they were, almost blinded by the icy
particles which were whirled with all the force of the
tempest against their faces, they struggled on for
more than half the distance which lay between them
and their destination. Then the three sailors cried
out simultaneously that they must halt, and the guide
unwillingly owned that he must follow their example.
Only the Saxon was left to go on, and he, with a
gesture which it was impossible to mistake, declared
his intention of persevering. Just at that moment
the clouds parted in the east, and the full moon
showed the landscape with a singular clearness, its
most conspicuous feature being the gigantic stones of
the Great Temple, which could be seen about two
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>miles to the northward. The guide pointed to them,
and the Saxon, when they caught his eye, leapt
forward with an energy which nothing seemed to
have abated, and, with a gesture of farewell to his
companions, plunged into the darkness.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="16" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XVI. The Great Temple"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XVI. The Great Temple"/>
<head>CHAPTER XVI.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">THE GREAT TEMPLE.</hi></head>

<p>
The Great Temple, or Stonehenge as it is now
called, though its decay had already commenced,
still preserved the form which we have now some
difficulty in tracing. There was an outer circle consisting
of thirty huge triliths,<note place="foot">A trilith consists of two upright stones with a third placed
across.</note> the greater part of
which were still standing in the position in which
the unsparing labour of a long past generation had
placed them. Within this there was a circle of forty
single stones, this circle again containing two ovals.
One of these ovals was composed of five triliths,
even larger than those which stood in the outer
circle; the other was made of nineteen upright
stones. At the upper end of this stood the altar, a
low, flat structure of blue marble.
</p>

<p>
All the preparations for the sacrifice were complete
when Cedric—for we may as well henceforth
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>call the Saxon by the name which he bore among his
countrymen—reached the spot. Carna was being
led by two of the subordinate priests to the altar,
where Caradoc stood, robed for the rite which he was
about to perform. The sky had now again cleared,
and the moon, riding high in the heavens, poured
a flood of silver light through the south entrance,
and fell on the priest’s impassive face as he stood
fronting the light, while it glittered on his crown
of gold and gave a dazzling brilliancy to his white
robe. In his hand he held a knife of flint, with
which it was the custom to give the first blow to the
victim, though innovation had so far prevailed even
in the Druid worship that the sacrifice was completed
with a weapon of steel. But this latter lay at his
feet, and was concealed by the fall of his robe. It
was not, indeed, supposed to be used. The attendants,
who were also dressed in white, were rough
and brutal creatures, selected for their office because
they could be trusted to carry out any orders without
remonstrance or hesitation. Yet even they seemed
touched by the girl’s dignity and courage, as she
walked with head erect and unfaltering gait between
them. Had she hesitated, or hung back, or struggled,
doubtless they would not have hesitated to drag her
to the altar; but walking as she did with a proud
resignation to her fate, they showed her a rude
respect by letting their hands rest as lightly as
pos<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>sible, so as to give no sense of constraint, upon her
arms. On either side of the priest stood Martianus
and Ambiorix. The younger man had braced himself
to what, fanatical patriot as he was, was evidently
a hateful task. He looked steadfastly and unflinchingly
at the scene; but his face was deadly pale,
and the blood trickled down his chin as he bit his lip
in the unconscious effort to maintain a stern composure.
Martianus was overwhelmed with shame
and horror. If there was one softer heart among
the <q>stern, black-bearded kings</q> who of old in
Aulis watched the daughter of Agamemnon die, he
must have looked and felt as Martianus did in the
Great Temple that night. Cursing again and again
in his heart the ambition which had led him to mix
himself up with this fanatical crew, but too much a
craven at heart to protest, he stood trembling with
agitation, mostly keeping his eyes shut or fixed upon
the earth, but sometimes compelled by a fascination
which he could not resist to lift them, and take in
the horror of the scene. Each of the chiefs had
an armed attendant standing behind him. Besides
these there were no spectators of the scene, though
guards were disposed at each of the entrances which
led to the central shrine. Even these had been kept
in ignorance of what was to be done, and they were
too deeply imbued with the traditional awe felt for
the Great Temple to think of playing the spy.
</p>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: The Sacrifice.]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><anchor id="fig166"/><figure url="images/i_191.jpg" rend="w80"><index index="fig" level1="The Sacrifice"/>
<head><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Sacrifice.</hi></head>
<figDesc>The Sacrifice</figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
<p>
The priest, after observing the position of the
moon, and seeing that the shadows fell now almost
straight towards the north, began the invocation
which was the preliminary of the sacrifice. It was
for this that the Saxon was waiting, as he stood in
the shadow of one of the huge triliths. He crept
silently out of his concealment, entirely unobserved,
so intent were all present on the scene that was
being enacted. His first object was the priest. This
had been laid down for him in the instructions given
him by the peddler before he started; and indeed his
own instinct would have dictated the act. The priest
put out of the way, the sacrifice would, for the time
at least, be stopped; for so high a solemnity could not
be performed but by one of the very highest rank.
Time would thus be gained, and with time anything
might happen. One firm thrust between the shoulders
sent the Saxon’s sword right through the priest’s
body, so that the point stood out an inch or two
from the priest. Without a cry the man fell forward,
deluging with his blood the stone of sacrifice. The
ministrants who stood on either side of Carna were
paralysed with astonishment and dismay. Before
they could recover themselves Cedric had dragged
his weapon out of the priest’s body, sheathed it, and
thrown himself on them. Two blows, delivered almost
simultaneously by fists that had almost the force
of sledge hammers, levelled them both senseless to
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>the ground. He then caught the girl up in his arms.
A full-grown woman—and Carna had a stature
beyond the average of her sex—is no light burden,
but Cedric’s strength was, as has been said before,
exceptionally great, and now it seemed doubled by
the fierce excitement of the hour. To escape with
her by running was, he knew, impossible. For such
a task no fleetness of foot, no strength, would be
sufficient. To attempt would be to expose himself to
certain death, and Carna to as certain re-capture.
But his quick eye had caught sight of a place where
he might hold out, at least for a time, against a much
superior strength of assailants. One of the triliths
had partially fallen, the huge cross-stone having been
so displaced that it formed an angle with one of its
supports, and so afforded a protection to the back
and sides of a fighter who managed to ensconce
himself in the niche, and who would so have only his
front to protect. Setting Carna behind him, and
making her understand by a movement of the hand
that she must crouch as low as she could upon the
ground, he prepared to hold his position. The odds
against him were not so heavy as might have been
supposed. The two ministrants were unarmed. Of
the four left, the two chiefs and their attendants,
one was a middle-aged man, who had never been
expert in arms; and who, whatever his skill and
strength, would scarcely have cared to use them in
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>such a conflict. Ambiorix, indeed, was of another
temper. The gloomy, fanatical doggedness with
which he had looked on at the preparations for the
sacrifice gave way to a fierce delight when he saw an
enemy before him with whom he could cross swords.
In his inmost soul he had hated the thought of the
sacrifice; but yet the man who had hindered it, and
with it the weal of Britain, was a foe whom it
would be pleasure to smite to the ground. But
fierce as was his temper, it was full of chivalry.
He would not dishonour himself by bringing odds
against an enemy. Signing to the armed attendants
to stand back, he advanced to challenge Cedric.
The Saxon, in height and strength, was more than
a match for his antagonist. But he was hampered
by his position, especially by the presence of the girl.
The weapon, too, with which he was armed—a short
Roman sword—was strange to him. He thought
with regret of his own good steel, an heirloom come
down to him from warriors of the past, and inscribed
with magic Runic rhymes, that was then lying at the
bottom of the Channel. The change, however, was
not really so much to his disadvantage as he thought.
The stones behind him would have hindered the long
sweeping blow which made the great Saxon swords
especially formidable. Altogether it might have
seemed as if Cedric must inevitably be worsted in
the struggle. The British chief, though he hated
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>the customs and even the civilization of the Roman
conquerors, had not disdained to learn what they
could teach him in the use of arms. They were
acknowledged masters in that, and he accepted the
maxim that it was right to be instructed even by
one’s bitterest enemy. Accordingly he knew all
that a fencing master could teach him; and all the
Saxon’s agility, quickness of eye, and strength, could
not counterbalance the advantage. Before many
minutes had passed Cedric was bleeding from two
wounds, neither of them very serious, but sufficient
to hamper and weaken him. One had been inflicted
on the sword-arm, and threatened to disable him
altogether before long. He felt this himself, and
took his resolve. <q>The curse of Thor upon this
foolish toy!</q> he cried, in his native tongue, as he
threw the short sword straight in the face of his
enemy; and followed up the strange missile by leaping
on his antagonist, both of whose arms he fastened
down to his sides with a supreme exertion of strength.
Gigantic strength, indeed, was the only thing which
gave so desperate a resort the chance of success, and
this might well have failed, if the adversary had not
been entirely unprepared for the movement. Once
held in this tremendous clasp, Ambiorix was as
helpless as a kid in the hug of a bear. Cedric
fairly lifted him off his feet, and threw him backwards.
His head struck one of the great stones
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>in his fall, and he lay senseless and helpless on the
ground.
</p>

<p>
The struggle was over so quickly that the attendants
had no time to interfere; nor when it was
finished did they feel any great eagerness to engage
so formidable a champion. Still they advanced, and
Martianus, who felt himself unable to maintain any
longer in the face of what had happened his attitude
of inaction, advanced with them. By this time
Carna, who had been almost stunned by the rapid
succession of startling incidents, had recovered her
self-possession. She lifted herself from the ground,
and stepped between Cedric and the three antagonists
who stood confronting him.
</p>

<p>
<q>Martianus,</q> she cried, <q>what are you doing here?
What mixes you up with these horrible doings—you,
my father’s friend, you, a Christian man?</q>
</p>

<p>
The Briton stood silent, cursing in his heart the
hideous enterprise which had not even the poor merit
of success. He was spared the necessity of speaking
by an exclamation from one of the ministrants.
</p>

<p>
<q>See!</q> cried the man, <q>there is a party coming.
It is not likely that they are friends—let us be off.</q>
</p>

<p>
And indeed the moonlight clearly showed a
number of persons who were rapidly advancing up
one of the great avenues.
</p>

<p>
Martianus did not hesitate.
</p>

<p>
<q>You are right,</q> he said to the man, <q>we must
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>go. The priest’s body must be left. It is useless to
cumber ourselves with the dead; we shall have as
much as we can do to escape ourselves, but take the
sacred things. They at least must not fall into the
hands of the enemy. And you,</q> he went on, addressing
himself to the two attendants, <q>take up
your master and carry him off. We have something
of a start, and it is possible that they may not pursue
us.</q>
</p>

<p>
His directions were at once obeyed. The priest’s
body was stripped of its robes and ornaments.
Ambiorix, who still lay unconscious on the ground,
was carried by the united efforts of the soldiers
and ministrants, and the whole party had started
in the direction of Amesbury before the new-comers,
who proved to be the priest Flavius, with a party of
his people, reached the Temple.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="17" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XVII. The British Village"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XVII. The British Village"/>
<head>CHAPTER XVII.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">THE BRITISH VILLAGE.</hi></head>

<p>
The British priest’s home was at a populous village
on the banks of the Avon, now known by the name
of Netton, and as this was some miles nearer than
Sorbiodunum, he determined to take thither the
party whom his opportune arrival had rescued from
danger. Once arrived there, it would be easy to send
a messenger to the town, and await further instructions.
A litter was hastily constructed for Carna,
who, though her spirits and courage were still unbroken,
was somewhat exhausted by excitement and
fatigue. The Saxon’s wounds were dressed and
bound up by the priest, who united some knowledge
of medicine and surgery to his other accomplishments,
and was indeed scarcely less well qualified
for the cure of bodies than of souls. The priest-doctor
looked somewhat grave when he saw how
deep the sword-cuts were, and how much blood had
been lost, but Cedric made light of his injuries,
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>scorned the idea of being carried, and indeed seemed
to find no difficulty in keeping close to Carna’s litter
on the homeward journey.
</p>

<p>
Netton—we are unable to give the British name of
the village—was reached some time before dawn.
At sunrise the priest, who had refreshed himself
with two or three hours’ sleep, was ready to perform
his office at his little church. It was the
first day of the week, and the building was crowded.
It was an oblong building, with a semicircular
eastern end, that resembled that kind of chancel
which is known by the name of an apse. It had
been designed by an Italian builder, who had copied
the shape that seems to have been used in the
earliest Christian buildings, that of the <foreign lang="la" rend='italic'>schola</foreign> or
meeting-house of the trade guilds or associations.
The body of the building was of timber. The eastern
end, or sanctuary, had a little more pretension to
ornament; it was of stone, and the walls were hung
with somewhat handsome tapestry, wrought with
symbolic designs.
</p>

<p>
Few of the party which had accompanied the
priest the night before were prevented by their
fatigue from being present. The Britons were always
a devout people, and in Netton their priest
had gained such an influence over them, that they
were exceptionally regular in their religious duties.
Carna had been anxious to attend the service, but
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>the priest’s wife—he had followed the usual practice
of the British Church in marrying before ordination—had
absolutely forbidden so unreasonable an exertion.
Cedric, who would otherwise have been present in
whatever part of the building was open to an
unbaptized person, was still buried in a profound
slumber. The service was in Latin, a language of
which most if not all the worshippers knew enough
to be able to follow the prayers. Such portions
of the Scriptures as were read were accompanied by
the priest with occasional expositions in the British
language; and the sermon, except the text, which was
in Latin, and taken from the recently published
Vulgate of St. Jerome, was wholly in that tongue.
The preacher’s text was from the Psalms, <q>Quomodo
dicitis animæ meæ, Transmigra in montem
sicut passer?</q><note place="foot"><q>How say ye then to my soul that she should flee as a
bird unto the hill?</q>—<hi rend='smallcaps'>Psalm</hi> xi. 1.</note> and was mostly concerned with
the troubles of the time. He had in an uncommon
degree the national gift of eloquence, and
stirred the hearts of his hearers to their inmost
depths. He warned them that troublous times were
approaching, such as neither they nor their fathers
had seen were approaching, and that they would
have to resist unto blood for the faith into which
they had been baptized.
</p>

<p>
<q>Antichrist,</q> he cried, adapting to the day, as
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>Christian preachers have done in every age, the
language of the apostles—<q>Antichrist is at hand!
You see him in these heathen hosts who are threatening
you on every side; these Saxon pirates from the
east, who are ravaging our shores; these Pictish
ravagers from the north, who every year are penetrating
further and further into the land. Yes,</q> he
added, with a telling reference to the event of the
night before, <q>and even in apostates of British
blood, who have preserved in your midst the hideous
superstitions from which our ancestors turned to
worship the blessed Christ; and as it was in the days
of the blessed Paul, so is it now: <q>He that letteth
will let till he be taken out of the way,</q> The Roman
power has kept these forces in check, but it will keep
them no more. The time is short. They are gathering
every day in greater strength, and you must gird yourselves
to meet them.</q> Therefore, he went on, they
must be strong and quit them like men. They must
gird on them, and make complete in every point, their
spiritual armour—the helmet of salvation, the sword
of the Divine Word, the all-covering shield of faith;
nor must they forget the temporal weapons with
which the outward enemies who assail the body must
be met. <q>He that hath no sword, let him sell his garment
and buy one,</q> cried the preacher, in his final
apostrophe to his people, <q>and he will find that as his
day so shall his strength be, and that the Lord can
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>deliver by few as by many, Gideon’s three hundred,
as by the eight hundred thousand men that drew
sword in Israel.</q>
</p>

<p>
Wrought by the eloquence of the orator to an
almost incontrollable excitement, the whole congregation
sprang to their feet, as if they were asking to
be led at once to the battle. Then, with a sudden
change from the stirring tone of the trumpet to the
sweet music of the flute, the preacher touched
another note. In a pleading voice, almost but never
quite broken with tears, he besought them to cleanse
their hearts; he reminded them that the armies of
the Lamb of God must be clothed in the white robe
of righteousness; that purity, tenderness to the weak,
charity to the fallen, were as needed for Christ’s
soldiers as steadfastness and courage, till many a
cheek was wet with tears of contrition and repentance.
</p>

<p>
In the course of the forenoon a fleet-footed messenger
was despatched to Sorbiodunum. By the time
he reached that town the Count and his party had
arrived, excepting one who had been left behind, still
too exhausted by his forced march to move. Some, too,
had been sent back in the hope that they might not
be too late to rescue the stragglers who had perforce
been left behind during the journey through the snow.
As there was now no immediate necessity of haste,
Ælius allowed his followers to rest and refresh
them<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>selves for the remainder of the day at
<anchor id="corr178"/><corr sic="Sorbiodunum">Sorbiodunum.</corr>
The following morning he went on to Netton, where he
found, to his great delight, that Carna had apparently
suffered no harm from her perilous adventures. His
gratitude to the Saxon was beyond the power of
words to express. Though it somewhat hurt his
Roman pride that a barbarian should ever have the
strength to hold out when all others fail, he did not
suffer his vexation to take anything from the hearty
warmth of his thanks. Cedric received them with
the courtesy of an equal, a bearing which both
Britons and Italians could not help resenting in their
hearts, while they reluctantly admired his surpassing
strength.
</p>

<p>
Three days were spent in Netton with much comfort
to the party, the priest and his people showing
them as liberal an hospitality as their means admitted,
and refusing the recompense which the Count
almost forced upon <anchor id="corr178a"/><corr sic="them,">them.</corr>
</p>

<p>
<q>Take something for your poor,</q> said Ælius, when
his arguments were exhausted.
</p>

<p>
<q>My people,</q> answered the priest, <q>must not lose
one of the most precious privileges of their Christian
life, the sweet compulsion of having to minister to
the necessities of those who want their help.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Then you cannot refuse some ornament for your
church,</q> the Count went on.
</p>

<p>
The good man hesitated for a moment. His
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>church was dear to his heart, and he would gladly
have seen it made as fair as art and wealth could
make it.
</p>

<p>
<q>My lord,</q> he replied, after his brief hesitation,
<q>in happier times, and in another place, I would not
refuse your generous offer. But now the poorer we
are the better. I should like to see our altar-vessels
of gold, but it would not be well to tempt the barbarians
to a deadly sin, and to expose Christian lives
to worse peril than that they now stand in, by such
treasures, of which the report could scarcely fail to
be spread abroad. Our chalices, and flagons, and
patens are now of lead, thinly covered for decency’s
sake with silver, and they are of no value to any but
those who use them. No, my lord, leave our church
with at least such safety as poverty can give. But
there are places in the world, I would fain believe,
though indeed in these days I scarce know where
they are, where Christian men worship God in security,
and where the treasures of the church are safe
from robbery. Let your gift be given there, when
you find the occasion. And if you will let me know
the place I shall be happy with imagining it, without
the anxious care of its custody.</q>
</p>

<p>
With this answer the Count was compelled to be
content, till at least next morning, by which time
Carna’s ready wit had suggested that the priest
could hardly refuse a gift of books.
</p>

<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>

<p>
<q>My lord,</q> said the good man, when the Count
renewed his offer in its fresh shape on the following
day, <q>your determined generosity has overcome me.
Books I cannot refuse either for my own sake or my
people’s. I sometimes feel that they are starved, or
at the best ill-fed with spiritual food. I can speak
to them of their every-day duties, but I cannot build
them up in their faith for lack of knowledge in myself,
and where is the knowledge to come from? Of books
I have none but my Bible and my Service-book, and
two small books of homilies. If I had some of the
commentaries and homilies of the two great doctors
of our Church, Hieronymus<note place="foot">Commonly called Jerome.</note> and Augustine, I should
be well content. I have heard of the great preacher
of Antioch and Constantinople, John the Golden
Mouth,<note place="foot">John Chrysostom, at Antioch 386-398, at Constantinople
398-404.</note> but, alas, I cannot read Greek.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You shall have them as soon as they can be got,</q>
said the Count.
</p>

<p>
In the course of the day the search party sent back
from Sorbiodunum returned. They had found one of
the stragglers still alive, and had brought him on to
the village where the first halt had been made.
There he was being carefully tended, but there was
no chance of his being restored to health for many
weeks to come. Of the other two they had a terrible
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>account to give. Only a few mangled remains could
be discovered, the poor creatures having been manifestly
devoured by wolves. All that could be hoped
was that they had expired before they were attacked.
</p>

<p>
The Count had now nothing to detain him, and as
he was for many reasons anxious to be at home, where
a multiplicity of duties were awaiting him, he determined
to start on the following day. His route
was first to Sorbiodunum. There he would be on the
main road leading to Venta Belgarum.<note place="foot">Winchester.</note> From Venta,
by following another main road he and his party
would make their way easily to the Camp of the
Great Harbour.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="18" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XVIII. The Picts"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XVIII. The Picts"/>
<head>CHAPTER XVIII.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">THE PICTS.</hi></head>

<p>
The journey to Venta Belgarum was accomplished
in safety, and, by dint of starting long before sunrise,
in a single day. The distance was a little more than
twenty miles, and the road, which was so straight
that the end of the journey might almost have been
seen from the beginning, lay almost through an open
country. This was favourable for speed, as there was
little or no need to reconnoitre the ground in advance.
It was just after sunrise when the party reached the
spot where the traces of the great camp of Constantius
Chlorus may still be seen. It had even then ceased
to be occupied, but the soldiers’ huts were still standing,
and the avenues, though overgrown with grass,
looked as if they might easily be thronged again with
all the busy life of a camp. The Count called a halt
for a few minutes, and pointed out the locality to
Carna.
</p>

<p>
<q>See,</q> said he, with a sigh, <q>there Constantius had
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>his camp, the great Constantius to whom we owe so
much.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And was Constantine himself ever there?</q> cried
the girl, to whom the first Christian Emperor was
the object of an admiration which we, knowing as
we do more about him, can hardly share.
</p>

<p>
<q>I doubt it,</q> returned the Count. <q>Constantius
made it and held it during his campaigns with
Allectus. But, my child, I was thinking not of its
past, but of its future. It will never be occupied
again.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why should it?</q> exclaimed the girl, almost
forgetting in her excitement that she was speaking
to a Roman. <q>Why should it? Why should not
Britain be happy and safe and free without the
legions? Forgive me, father,</q> she added, remembering
herself again; <q>I am the last person in the
world who should be ungrateful to Rome.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I don’t blame you,</q> said the Count, and as he
looked at the maiden’s flashing eyes and remembered
how bravely she had gone through terrors which
would have driven most women out of their senses,
he thought to himself—<q>Ah, if there were but a few
thousand men who had half the spirit of this woman
in them, the end might be different. My child,</q> he
went on, <q>I would not discourage you, but there are
dark days before this island. She has enemies by
sea and land, and I doubt whether she has the
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>strength to strike a sufficient blow for herself. I am
thankful that you will be safely away before it
comes.</q>
</p>

<p>
Carna was about to speak, but checked herself. It
was not the time she felt to speak out her heart.
</p>

<p>
For some time after this little or nothing of interest
occurred; but as the party approached within a
few miles of Venta the scene underwent a remarkable
change. The road had hitherto been almost
entirely deserted; it was now thronged: but the face
of every passenger was turned towards Venta, not a
single traveller was going the other way. Every by-way
and bridle-path and foot-path that touched the
road contributed to swell the throng. In fact, the
whole countryside was in motion. And the fugitives,
for their manifest hurry and alarm proclaimed to be
nothing less, carried all their property with them.
Carts laden with rustic furniture, on the top of which
women and children were perched, waggons loaded
with the harvest of the year, droves of sheep and
cattle helped to crowd the road till it was almost
impassable. And still the hurrying pace, the fearful
anxious glances cast behind showed that it was some
terrible danger from which this timid multitude was
flying. For some time, so stupified with fear were the
fugitives, Ælius could get no rational answer to the
questions which he put. <q>The Picts! The Picts!
They are upon us!</q> at last said a man whom a
sud<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>den catastrophe that brought a great pile of household
goods to the ground, had compelled to halt, and who
was glad to get the help of the Count’s attendants to
restore them, all help from neighbours being utterly
out of the question when all were selfishly intent on
saving their own lives and property. When his
property had been set in its place again the man
thanked the Count very heartily, and was collected
enough to tell all he knew.
</p>

<p>
<q>There is no doubt that the Picts are not far off.
I have not seen anything of them myself, thank
heaven! but I could see the fires last night all along
the sky to the north.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Have they ever been here before?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Never quite here. You see, sir, the camp at
Calleva<note place="foot">Calleva Attrebatium, now known as Silchester, one of the
most perfect specimens of a Roman camp to be seen in this
country.</note> kept them in check. A party did slip by,
I know, some little way to the westward, and I was
glad to hear they got rather roughly handled. But,
generally, they did not like to come anywhere near
the camps. But now these are deserted, and there is
nothing to keep them back.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But why don’t you defend yourselves?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah, sir, we have not the strength, nor even the
arms. You are a Roman, I see, and, if I may
judge, a man in authority, and you know that I am
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>speaking the truth. You have not allowed us to do
anything for ourselves, and how can we do it now at
a few months’ notice?</q>
</p>

<p>
The Count made no answer; indeed, none was
possible.
</p>

<p>
<q>And you expect to find shelter at Venta?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I don’t say that I expect it, but it is our only
chance. The place has at least walls.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And any one to man them?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>There should be some old soldiers, but how
many I cannot say; anyhow, scarcely enough for a
garrison.</q>
</p>

<p>
When the Count learned the situation he felt that
his best course would be to press on with his party
to Venta with all the speed possible. The chief
authority of the town was in the hands of a native,
who had the title of Head of the City.<note place="foot">Princeps Civitatis.</note> It was
possible that this officer might be a man of courage
and capacity; but it was far more likely that he
would be quite unequal to the emergency. In either
case the Count felt that his advice and personal
influence might be of very great use. Even the
twenty stout soldiers whom he had with him would
be no inconsiderable addition to the fighting force of
the place. Accordingly he gave orders to his followers
to quicken their pace. Fortunately the greater part
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>of the fugitives was behind them; still it was no
easy task for the party to make its way through the
struggling masses of human beings and cattle, and it
was past sunset when they rode up to the gates of
Venta.
</p>

<p>
It was evident that the bad news had already
arrived. The gates were closely shut, while the
walls were crowded with spectators anxiously looking
northwards for signs of the approaching enemy.
The porter was at first unwilling to admit the strangers,
peering anxiously through the wicket at them,
and declaring that he must first consult his superior.
One of the spectators on the wall happened, however,
to recognize the Count, and the party was admitted
without further question, and rode up at once to the
quarters of the Commander of the Town.
</p>

<p>
If he had hoped to find an official with whom it
would be possible or profitable to co-operate in the
<foreign lang="la" rend='italic'>Princeps</foreign> of Venta, the Count was very much disappointed.
He was an elderly man, who had realized
a fair fortune by contracting for the provisioning of
the army in Southern Britain, and had done very
fairly as long as he had nothing to do but execute
the orders of the military governor. Left to himself
he was absolutely helpless. Indeed he had been
taking refuge from his anxieties in the wine-cup, and
the Count found him at least half intoxicated. At
the moment of the party’s arrival the poor creature
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>had reached the valorous stage of drunkenness, and
was loud in his declarations that there was no possible
danger.
</p>

<p>
<q>They will know better,</q> he said, <q>than to come
near Venta. If they do, very few will go back.
Indeed I should like nothing better than to give them
a lesson. You shall see something worth looking at
if you will give us the pleasure of your company in
our little town for a day or two.</q>
</p>

<p>
Another cup, which he drained to the prosperity of
Britain and the confusion of her enemies, changed
his mood. He now seemed to have forgotten all
about the invaders, insisted on recognizing a dear
friend of past times in the Count, and invited him to
spend the rest of the day in talking over old times.
</p>

<p>
The Count did not waste many minutes with the
old man, but when he left the house the darkness
had already closed in. After finding with some
difficulty accommodation for Carna, he returned to
the gate, anxious to learn for himself how things
were going on. He found the place a scene of
frightful confusion. The warders had abandoned
their office as hopeless. An incessant stream of
fugitives, men, women, and children, mingled with
carts and waggons of every shape and size, was
pouring into the town. Every now and then one of
these vehicles, brought out perhaps in the sudden
emergency from the repose of years, broke down and
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>blocked the way. Then the living torrent began to
rage at the obstacle, as a river in flood roars about a
tree which has fallen across its current. Shortly the
offending vehicle would be removed by main force,
and with a very scanty regard for its contents. Then
the uproar lulled again, though there never ceased a
babel of voices, cursing, entreating, complaining,
quarrelling, through all the gamut of notes, from the
deepest base to the shrillest treble. The wall was
crowded with the inhabitants of the town, and every
eye was fixed intently on the northern horizon.
There, as was only too plainly to be seen, the sky
was reddened with a dull glow, which might have
been described as a sunrise out of place, but that it
was brightened now and then for a moment by a
shoot of flame. <q>Where are they?</q> <q>How soon
will they be here?</q> were the questions which every
one was asking, and which no one attempted to
answer. The Count made his way with some difficulty
along the top of the rampart in search of some
one from whom he might hope to get some rational
account of the situation. At last he found among
the spectators an old man, whose bearing struck him
as having something soldierly about it. A nearer
look showed him a military decoration. He lost no
time in addressing him.
</p>

<p>
<q>Comrade,</q> he said, <q>I see that you have followed
the eagles.</q>
</p>

<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>

<p>
The veteran recognized something of the tone of
command in the Count’s voice, and made a military
salute.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, sir, so I have, though my sword has been
hanging up for more than thirty years.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And what do you think of the prospect?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Badly, sir, badly. This is just what I feared;
but it has come even sooner than I looked for it.
Things have been very bad for some time in the
north ever since the garrisons were taken from the
Wall,<note place="foot">The wall of Antoninus, built to defend Northern Britain
from the Caledonians, and held by Roman forces till far on in
the fourth century.</note> but, except for a troop of robbers now and
then, we were fairly safe here. But now that these
barbarians know that the legions are gone, there will
be no stopping them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>They are the Picts, I hear. Have you ever had
to do with them?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, sir, I have seen as much of them as ever I
want to see. I came to this island thirty-nine years
ago with Theodosius, grandfather, you know, of the
Augustus;</q> and the old man, who was steadfastly
loyal to the Emperor, bared his head as he
spoke. <q>I am a Batavian from the island of the
Rhine, and was then a deputy-centurion in Theodosius’
army. We found Britain full of the savages.
They had positively over-run the whole country as
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>far as the southern sea, and only the walled towns
had escaped them, and these were almost in despair.
I shall never forget how the people at Londinium
crowded about the general, kissing his hands and
feet, when he rode into the town. But I must not tire
you with an old soldier’s stories. You ask me about
the Picts. They are the worst savages I ever saw,
and I have had some experience too. They go naked
but for some kind of a skin girdle about their loins,
and they are hideously painted, and their hair is
more like a beast’s than a man’s, and then they eat
human flesh. Ah, sir, you may shake your head,
but I know it. We used to find dead bodies with
the fleshy parts cut off where they had been. I
shudder to think of what I saw in those days. Well,
we gave them a good lesson, drove them back to their
own country, and an awful country it is, all lakes
and mountains, with not so much as a blade of corn
from one end to the other. But now they will be
as bad as ever.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But you are safe here in Venta, I suppose?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Safe! I wish we were. If we had a proper
garrison here, there is no one to command them.
You have seen the <foreign lang="la" rend='italic'>Princeps</foreign>?</q>
</p>

<p>
The Count said nothing, but his silence was
significant.
</p>

<p>
<q>But there is no garrison. There are not more than
fifty men in the place who have ever carried arms.</q>
</p>

<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>

<p>
<q>But surely the people will defend themselves.
You, as an old soldier, know very well that civilians,
who would be quite useless in the field, may do good
service behind walls.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>True, sir, if they have two things—a spirit and a
leader; and these people, as far as I can tell, have
neither.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>That is a bad look out. But tell me—how soon
do you think the enemy will be here?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Not to-night, certainly; perhaps not to-morrow.
And indeed it is just possible that they may not come
at all. You see that they get a great quantity of
plunder in the country without much trouble or
danger, and they may leave the towns alone. Barbarians
mostly don’t care to knock their heads against
stone walls, and of course they think us a great deal
stronger than we are.</q>
</p>

<p>
After making an appointment with his new acquaintance
for a meeting on the following day, the
Count rejoined his party.
</p>

<p>
The next day the <foreign lang="la" rend='italic'>Princeps</foreign> called a meeting of the
principal burgesses of the town, at which the Count,
in consideration of his rank as a Roman official, was
invited to attend. The tone of the meeting was
better than he had expected. There were one or two
resolute men among the local magistrates, and these
contrived to communicate something of their spirit
to the rest. A general levy of the inhabitants
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>between the ages of sixteen and sixty was to be made.
The town was divided into districts, and recruiting
officers were appointed for each. By an unanimous
vote of the meeting the Count was requested to take
the chief command. The delay of the invaders
gave some time for carrying out these preparations
for defence. A force was speedily raised, sufficient,
as far at least as numbers were concerned, to garrison
the walls. This was divided into companies,
each having two watches, which were to be on duty
alternately. The whole extent of work was divided
among them, and the town was stored with such
missiles as could be collected or manufactured,
while Carna busied herself among the women, organizing
the supply of food and drink for the guards of
the wall, and preparations for the care of the wounded.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="19" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XIX. The Siege"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XIX. The Siege"/>
<head>CHAPTER XIX.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">THE SIEGE.</hi></head>

<p>
Day after day the burgesses of Venta awaited the
course of events. For some time they hoped that,
after all, the town might not be visited by the invaders.
The lurid glow of the skies by night, and
the clouds of smoke by day, sometimes borne by the
wind so close to the town that the smell could be
distinctly recognized, proved that they were still
near. But though the effects of their work of ruin
were visible enough, of the barbarians themselves no
one had yet caught a glimpse. But towards the
evening of the seventh day after the Count’s arrival
a party was seen to emerge from a wood, distant
about half a mile from the gates. There were
four in all; two of them were mounted on small
and very shaggy ponies, the others were on foot. The
party advanced till they were about a hundred yards
from the wall, and though the fading light prevented
them from being seen very clearly, there could be no
doubt that they were some of the dreaded Picts.
</p>

<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>

<p>
A debate, which seemed, from the gesticulations
of the speakers to be of a somewhat violent kind,
was carried on for a time among the savages. Then
one of the mounted men rode, with all the speed
to which his diminutive horse could be urged, almost
up to the gates of the town. He wore a deer-skin
robe of the very simplest construction, with holes
through which his head and arms were thrust. His
legs were bare. Round his neck was hung a bow of
a very rude kind. In his right hand he carried a
short spear. With the butt of this he struck violently
at the gate, as if demanding entrance, and
after waiting a few seconds, as it seemed for an
answer, turned his pony’s head and began to ride
back to his party. He had almost reached them
before the defenders of the wall had recovered from
the astonishment which his audacity had caused
them. Then one who was armed with a bow discharged
at the retreating figure an arrow, which
more by good luck than skill, for scarcely any aim
had been taken, struck the Pict on the neck. He did
not fall from his horse, but swayed heavily to one
side, catching at the animal’s mane to steady himself.
His three companions rushed forward to help
him, and in another moment would have carried him
off, but for the resolution and activity of the Saxon,
who with the Count was standing on the rampart
close to the gate. He lowered himself by his hands
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>from the wall, a height of about fifteen feet, itself no
small feat of activity, and ran at his full speed, a
speed which, as has been said before, was quite
uncommon. Hampered as they were by having to
keep their wounded companion in the saddle, the Picts
could move but slowly, and were soon overtaken.
With two blows, delivered with all his gigantic
strength, Cedric levelled two of them to the ground,
and, seizing the wounded chief, threw him over his
shoulder, then turning ran towards the gate. For a
moment the third Pict stood too astonished to move.
Cedric had thus a start of some yards, and before he
could be overtaken, had got so close to the wall as
to be under the protection of the archers and slingers
who lined it. The next moment the wicket of the
gate was opened, and the prisoner secured.
</p>

<p>
It was evident that he was a prize of some value,
for a rudely wrought chain of gold round his neck
showed that he was a chief. He had ridden up to
the gate against the advice of his followers, as it was
guessed, under the influences of copious draughts of
metheglin. The effect of the liquor, together with
the pain of his wound and the shock of his capture,
had been to make him insensible when he was
brought into the town. While he was in this state
his wound was dressed by a slave who had some
surgical skill, and who declared that though serious it
was not mortal. When he recovered consciousness
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>he behaved more like a wild beast than a man. His
first act was to tear furiously at the bandage which
had been applied to his wound. The attendants
mastered him with difficulty, for he fought with the
ferocity of a wild cat, and then bound his hands and
feet. Thus rendered helpless, he raved at the top of
his voice till sheer exhaustion reduced him to silence,
a silence which was soon followed by sleep.
</p>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: Cedric and the Pict.]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><anchor id="fig196"/><figure url="images/i_223.jpg" rend="w80"><index index="fig" level1="Cedric and the Pict"/>
<head><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cedric and the Pict.</hi></head>
<figDesc>Cedric and the Pict</figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<p>
The night passed without any attack. It was
evident that the Picts were in considerable force, for
their watch fires were to be seen scattered over a
wide extent of country, and there was much anxious
talk in the town about the chances of a siege. Few
indeed in Venta closed their eyes that night, and
with the earliest morning the whole town was astir.
The invaders, of course, had no notion of how a siege
should be conducted, nor had they the necessary
mechanical means even if they had known how to
use them. Their arrows did but little harm, for
their bows were ill made, and had but a small range,
nothing like that which was commanded by the
better weapons of the defenders. With the sling,
however, they were singularly expert, and inflicted
no small damage, making indeed some parts of the
walls scarcely tenable. But as they could do nothing
without showing themselves, they suffered more loss
than they inflicted. In the early days of the siege
especially, a catapult, which the garrison worked
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>from the walls, did great damage among them. After
awhile they were careful not to collect in such numbers
as to give a fair mark for this piece of artillery.
</p>

<p>
The townspeople were greatly elated at their
success, and when, about a fortnight after the first
appearance of the invaders before the walls, two days
had passed without one of them being visible, concluded
that, hopeless of making any impression upon
the place, they had disappeared.
</p>

<p>
They were soon undeceived. It was growing dusk
on the third day after the supposed departure of the
enemy, when a heavily laden cart was drawn up to
the western gate of the city. The driver, apparently
a country man, knocked for admittance. By rights,
at such an hour, it should have been refused, but the
vigilance of the watch had begun to slacken, most of
the besieged believing that the danger was practically
over. Accordingly, no difficulty was made about
throwing open the gates. But, once thrown open,
they were not so easily closed. Just as the cart was
passing through the opening in the wall one of the
wheels came off, and the vehicle broke down hopelessly.
Commonly it would not have taken long to
clear the obstacle out of the way. There was usually
a throng of people about the gates and on the walls,
and a multitude of willing hands would have been
ready to lend their help. But just at this moment
the gates and walls were almost deserted.
Even-<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>song was going on in the Church of Venta, and a
preacher of some local fame was expected to enlarge
on the Divine mercy shown in the deliverance of the
town from the barbarians. The keepers of the gate
would, therefore, have been at a loss even if they had
seen the necessity of bestirring themselves. As it
was, they were content to do nothing. They amused
themselves by standing by and laughing at the rustic
driver as he slowly unladed from his vehicle its miscellaneous
cargo, the contents, it seemed, of one of
the country-side cottages, from which the terror of the
invasion had driven their inhabitants. The process
of unloading, carried on slowly and with much
grumbling, was scarcely half finished, when one of
the warders, chancing to look behind him, caught
sight of a body of men rapidly approaching through
the darkness. A number of Picts had concealed
themselves in the wood mentioned before as distant
about half a mile from the wall, and when they
saw the gate blocked by the broken-down cart—a
part, it need hardly be said, of the stratagem—had
made a rush to get to it before the obstacle could be
removed. A hasty alarm was raised, and some of the
citizens who were in hearing ran up. But it was too
late. The rustic driver, a villain whose treacherous
services had been bought by the enemy, had quickened
his work when he saw his employers approaching, and
contrived to finish the unloading of the cart at the
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>very moment of their coming up. In a few moments
some of them had clambered over the empty vehicle,
struck down the guards, and disabled the fastenings
of the gates. Before many minutes had passed the
whole of the ground outside the gates seemed to
swarm with the enemy, and though the townspeople
had now begun to make a rally in force, it was too
late to make any effectual effort to keep them out.
The situation would in any case have been full of
danger. At Venta it was hopeless. A garrison of
veterans might have kept their heads, but there were
not more than sixty or seventy among the defenders
of Venta who had ever seen service in the field; and
the citizen soldiers were fairly panic-stricken when
they saw themselves actually facing a furious, yelling
crowd of barbarians, cruel and savage creatures in
reality, and commonly reported to be even worse
than they were. Without even striking a blow they
turned and fled. The Count, whom the alarm had
just reached, was met, and, for a time, carried away
by the tide of fugitives. Still he was able to rally a
few men to his side for a last effort. Some of his own
followers were with him, and the rest could be fetched
in a few moments. The gallant old centurion, in
spite of his seventy years, was prompt with the offer
of his sword; and, as always happens, the infection
of courage spread not less rapidly than the infection
of cowardice. Altogether a compact body of about
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>a hundred men were collected. Well armed and well
disciplined they turned a steadfast face to the enemy,
and were able to make their retreat to a little fort
which stood on a hill to the south-east of the town.
Carna, the priest of Venta and his family, and a few
other non-combatants were with them. More, in the
terrible confusion of the scene, it was impossible to
rescue. All through the trying time Cedric distinguished
himself by his coolness and courage. When
once he had seen Carna safely bestowed in the centre
of the party, and had also seen that the person of
the Pictish chief was secured (having the presence
of mind to foresee that he would be a valuable
hostage), he took up a position in the extreme rear
of the retreat, and performed prodigies of valour in
keeping the pursuers at bay.
</p>

<p>
The occupation of the fort could, of course, do
nothing more than give them a breathing space.
Though it had been for some time unoccupied, its
defences were tolerably perfect, and it might have
been held against a barbarian enemy as long as
provisions held out. Unfortunately this was the
weak part of their position. Of provisions they had
very little. Luckily the place had latterly been used
as a warehouse, and contained some sacks of flour.
A few sheep were feeding in a meadow hard by, and
were hastily driven within the defences. Happily
there was a well within the walls.
</p>

<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>

<p>
That night was a dismal experience which none of
the party ever forgot. A confused noise came up from
the town, where the savages were busy with plunder
and massacre. Every now and then some piercing
shriek was heard, curdling the blood of all the
listeners. At other times the loud crash of some
falling building could be distinguished. Towards
midnight flames could be seen bursting out from
various parts of the town, and before an hour had
passed, every eye was fixed on a hideous spectacle,
on which it was an agony to look, but from which it
yet seemed impossible to turn. Venta was on fire.
The flames could be seen to catch street after street,
and distinctly against the lurid background of the
burning houses could be seen, flitting here and there,
as they busied themselves with the work of destruction,
the dark shapes of the barbarians. When the
morning dawned only a few detached buildings,
among them the church, a basilica of some size,
built by the munificence of the Empress Helena,
were standing.
</p>

<p>
The party in the fort reviewed their position
anxiously. The civilians were for the most part in
favour of staying where they were. They felt the
substantial protection of the stout walls which surrounded
them, and were indisposed to leave it. The
military men, on the other hand, recognized facts
more clearly and more completely. The protection
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>of the fort was worth this and this only—that it gave
them time to reflect. To stand a siege would be to
ensure destruction.
</p>

<p>
<q>We must cut our way through,</q> said the Count.
<q>If we do not try it now we shall have to try it three
or four days hence, and try it with less courage, and
hope, and strength, and probably fewer men than we
have now.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Cut our way through all those thousands of
savages!</q> said the <foreign lang="la" rend='italic'>Princeps</foreign>, who was one of the
few who had escaped from the town. <q>No; we
should be fools to leave the shelter of these walls.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Shelter!</q> cried the old centurion; <q>will they
shelter you against famine? No; let us go while we
have strength to walk.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But how,</q> said another of the townspeople, <q>how
will you do all the three things at once—retreat, and
fight, and save the women? A few of the men may
get through, but it will be as much as they can do to
take care of themselves.</q>
</p>

<p>
The argument was only too clear, and the Count
turned away with a groan of despair. The prospect
seemed hopeless. All the comfort that he could
find was in the thought that he and Carna should
anyhow, not fall alive into the hands of the
barbarians.
</p>

<p>
But now Cedric came again to the rescue with the
happy thought which had made him carry off the
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>Pictish chief. He said nothing to any of his companions;
but he managed the affair with the prisoner,
and managed it with an astonishing speed and
success. He pointed to a party of the chief’s fellow-countrymen
who were approaching the fort, by way,
it appeared, of reconnoitring its defences, and
intimated that he wished to open communications
with them, showing at the same time, by holding up
two of his fingers, that not more than two were to
approach. The chief, whose intelligence was sharpened
by a keen sense of his danger, by a shrill
piercing whistle, twice repeated, conveyed this
intimation to his countrymen, and two of them
approached to within speaking distance of the walls.
Cedric now addressed himself to the task of making
his prisoner understand that his life and liberty
depended upon his inducing his countrymen to
retire. This was not very easily done. The expressive
gestures of drawing a knife across the
throat was readily understood; and at last by a
pantomime of signs he was made to comprehend
that this would be the result, if his countrymen
were to approach the walls. Then the other alternative
was expressed. One of the bonds with which
he was secured was partially loosed, and this action
was accompanied by a sweeping gesture of the hand
towards the north, which was to indicate that that
must be their way, if he was to be freed. A light of
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>comprehension gradually dawned in the chief’s eye,
and the Saxon had little doubt that he had made his
meaning intelligible. Whether the man could be
trusted to keep the engagement was what neither he
nor any one could say. But it was clear that the
risk had to be run, for the only possible hope of
escape lay in this direction. A conversation followed
between the chief and his countrymen, accompanied
by signs which were intended to convey to the Saxon
the purport of what he was saying. When it was
over, they disappeared, and the chief, turning to
Cedric, raised his hands to the sky in a gesture which
the latter interpreted, and rightly interpreted, to
mean that he was calling the powers above to witness
his fidelity to the engagement which he had made.
</p>

<p>
Cedric then communicated the result of his negotiations
through his interpreter the peddler to the
Count. It was not received with unanimous approval
by the party in the fort. The <foreign lang="la" rend='italic'>Princeps</foreign>
especially protested loudly against trusting their
lives to the good faith of a couple of savages. <q>A
Pict and a Saxon!</q> he cried, <q>the worst enemies that
Britain has, and you think that they are going to
save us!</q> He was quickly overruled by the Count,
who let him understand quite plainly that he would
be left to shift for himself unless he availed himself
of this chance of escape.
</p>

<p>
<q>Do as you please,</q> was Ælius’s first utterance,
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/><q>you have authority over the fort, and if you choose
to defend it with as many of your friends as you can
induce to stay with you, I cannot hinder you. But
you must take the consequences, and I haven’t the
shadow of a doubt what these will be. Meanwhile,
I and my party mean to go. As for the Pict, I know
nothing of him; the Saxon I would trust with my
life, and what is far dearer to me, the life of my
daughter. He has proved his good faith already in
such a way that I for one shall never doubt him
again.</q>
</p>

<p>
Preparations for departure were hastily made.
Indeed there was little to prepare. The party had
simply nothing with them except their arms. Every
one had to walk—for food they had to trust to what
they might find on the road. But before they started
the Count loosed with his own hand the chief’s bonds.
The chief put his hand upon his heart, and then
lifted it to the sky with the same gesture of appeal
that he made before.
</p>

<p>
It is sufficient to say that he kept his word, for
the party reached the coast without molestation.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="20" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XX. Cedric in Trouble"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XX. Cedric in Trouble"/>
<head>CHAPTER XX.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">CEDRIC IN TROUBLE.</hi></head>

<p>
For several weeks life passed at the villa with little
change or incident. But the Count, though he kept
a cheerful face, and talked gaily of the future to his
daughter and Carna, felt more acutely every day how
full his position was of anxieties and difficulties.
First came, as it always does come first, the question
of money. It had never been a very easy matter to
provide for the expenses of the fleet. Again and
again the Count had drawn on his private means,
which were happily very large. But these had
lately been crippled by the troubled condition of the
provinces in which his estates were situated, and
even if they had been untouched the burden that now
threatened to fall upon them would have been too
great for them to bear. Some of the seaport towns
would, he hoped, continue to pay their contributions.
He was personally popular, and his influence
would do something. Then, again, he could still
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>give at least some return for the money. The sea-coast
must be protected from the enemy, and no one
could protect it so cheaply and so effectually as he.
From the inland towns, which had always grumbled
at having to pay an impost from which they saw no
visible advantage, nothing was to be hoped. And any
expectation of money from the authorities at home
was quite out of the question.
</p>

<p>
One thing was quite certain: the establishment
must be reduced within much narrower limits. He
must diminish the fleet, and lessen also the range of
shore which he professed to defend. He could not
henceforth pretend to go north of the mouth of the
Thamesis. For the coast southward and westward
he might be able to provide more or less effectually.
More he could not do.
</p>

<p>
One of the first necessities of the changed position
in which he found himself was that he must give up
the villa on the east coast. It would be a matter for
after consideration whether the island of Vectis was
not too much out of the way. But till that point
could be settled, it would have to be his head-quarters.
To carry out these new arrangements, and to wind
up affairs in the region which he was preparing to relinquish,
a voyage became necessary. On this voyage
the Count started early in April. He arranged for
disposing of that part of the fleet which he could
not hope to keep in his own pay. Some of the
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>oldest galleys were broken up; others were handed
over to the authorities of the coast-towns, on the
understanding that they were to man and pay them
themselves. A few picked men were taken from the
crews by the Count; the rest, excepting such as were
re-engaged by the local authorities, were discharged.
When this had been done, and the villa had been
dismantled, the Count prepared to return to the
island.
</p>

<p>
Here, meanwhile, there had been trouble. The
Saxon had quietly returned to his work at the forge,
and would have been perfectly content, as far as
could be judged from his demeanour, if only he had
been left alone, and permitted to pay as before his
distant worship to Carna. But to some members of
the villa household he was an object of dislike.
They were jealous of the favour in which the Count
and the Count’s family held him. They were
naturally not at all pleased at what they could not
but acknowledge his great superiority in strength,
and as Christians, though not particularly zealous in
their performance of most of their duties, they felt
themselves to be unquestionably zealous and sincere
in their hatred and contempt for a pagan. The
Saxon, on the other hand, heartily despised those by
whom he was surrounded. They were slaves, or
little better than slaves, and he was a freeman and a
chief, though the gods had made him a prisoner.
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>He went to and fro among them with a scorn which
was not the less evident because it was not expressed
in words.
</p>

<p>
For a time this enforced silence helped to
keep the peace; Cedric knew nothing of the British
tongue, or of the mongrel Latin which sometimes took
its place, and the other inhabitants of the villa
nothing of Saxon. There were angry and contemptuous
looks on both sides, but there was nothing
more; or if there were words, these were harmless,
because they were not understood. But by degrees
this was changed. Cedric had intelligence of no
common kind—indeed he was something of a poet
among his own people—he had many motives for
learning the language of those among whom he
dwelt, his adoration for Carna being one of the most
powerful, and he had, too, opportunities for learning.
The peddler taught him much, and Carna, who
never forgot her zealous desire for his conversion,
taught him more. The end was that he picked up
much of the British language with extraordinary
rapidity, and, in little more than six months after his
capture, could express himself with some ease and
fluency.
</p>

<p>
This was very well in its way, but it had the
unfortunate result that he began to understand and
be understood. Every day the relations between him
and the domestics and artizans employed about the
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>villa became worse and worse, and it was not long
before matters came to a crisis.
</p>

<p>
Cedric had repeatedly noticed that the tools which
he used in the forge had been hidden or mischievously
damaged. He was too proud to complain,
and indeed his temper was curiously patient in any
matter where he did not conceive his honour to be
involved. He said nothing about the matter,
searched for his missing tools, and if he could not
find them, continued to do without them, and repaired
the injuries as best he could. The offender,
of course, grew bolder with impunity, and at last the
limits of Cedric’s endurance were reached and passed.
Coming into the forge at an unusually early hour
one morning, he caught the doer of the mischief in
the very commission of a more serious piece of
mischief than he had yet ventured, namely, cutting
a hole in the bellows. He lifted the offender by the
skin of the neck—he was a lad of about sixteen,
and son of the chief bailiff of the farm attached to
the villa—shook him, as a dog shakes a rat, yet
without forgetting that he was but a boy, dipped him
head foremost in the bath of the forge, and then let
him go, more dead than alive from the fear that he
felt at finding himself in the hands of the great giant.
</p>

<p>
Unluckily at the very moment when the young
rascal was being dismissed in a paroxysm of howling
with a contemptuous kick, his father entered the
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>yard. No one about the place was more prejudiced
against the Saxon, or more jealous of the favour in
which he stood with the Count and his family. He
had too, in its very worst form, the ungovernable
Celtic temper, and now, when he saw his son, a
spoilt boy whom everybody else disliked, ill-treated
as he thought by the prisoner, he was fairly carried
out of himself.
</p>

<p>
<q>Pagan dog!</q> he cried, <q>do you dare to touch
with your beast’s foot a Christian boy?</q> and he
struck at the Saxon with a long cart whip which he
had in his hand.
</p>

<p>
The end of the lash caught the Saxon’s cheek, on
which it raised an ugly-looking wheal. Even in the
height of his passion the Briton stood aghast at the
change which came in a moment over the form and
features of the Saxon. One or two of the bystanders
had seen him face to face with an enemy, and had
wondered how strangely calm he had seemed to be,
showing no sign of excitement, except a certain
glitter in his eyes. He had a very different look
now. <q>The form of his visage was changed,</q> as it
was in the Babylonian king<note place="foot">Daniel iii. 19.</note> when he found himself,
for the first time in his life, confronted by a
point-blank refusal to obey. A consuming anger,
like the Berseker rage of his kinsmen of after times,
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>the Vikings, seemed to possess and transform him.
His features worked, as if caught by some strange
malady, his eyes literally blazed with fury, his whole
figure seemed to dilate. The luckless bailiff was
seized round the middle, lifted from the ground as
easily as if he had been a child in arms, and hurled
with a crash, like a bolt from a catapult, against the
wall. He lay there bleeding from nose and mouth,
while the horror-stricken Britons stood helpless and
afraid to move.
</p>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: Cedric’s Fury.]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><anchor id="fig212"/><figure url="images/i_241.jpg" rend="w80"><index index="fig" level1="Cedric’s Fury"/>
<head><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cedric’s Fury.</hi></head>
<figDesc>Cedric’s Fury</figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<p>
<q>Dogs of slaves,</q> cried Cedric, <q>do you dare to
growl at your master;</q> and he swept through the
terrified crowd, laying them low on either side.
Happily at the moment he had no weapon in his
hand, but he seized a bar of iron from the anvil of
the forge, and swinging it round his head, prepared,
it seemed, to deal about him an indiscriminate
destruction. What would have followed it is impossible
to say. In his fury and in his absolute
mastery over that shrinking crowd, he was like a
tiger in the midst of a flock of sheep. But at the
critical moment, before his hand had dealt a single
blow, the apparition of Carna interposed between
him and his victims. The uproar in the court had
reached her in her chamber, and brought her ready
to play her accustomed part of peacemaker. Now
she stood, her figure framed like a picture, in the
door which opened on the court from the part of the
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>villa which she occupied. She wore a simple dress
of white, fastened with a blue girdle; her long chestnut
hair fell in loose waves to her waist, for she had
not had time to arrange it in more orderly fashion.
Her face was pale and troubled, her eyes wide open
with a sad surprise. It was indeed another Cedric
that she saw from the one whom she had known.
Was this terrible savage, who looked more like some
dreadful spirit from the abyss than a human creature,
the gentle giant in whose mute homage she had felt
such an innocent pleasure, the hopeful pupil whom
she was teaching, as she hoped, to put away savage
ways for the mild and peaceful behaviour of a
Christian. As for Cedric, he seemed paralyzed at
the vision that presented itself to him. The sight
of the girl always moved him strangely; now
she reminded him of the time when he had first
seen her by the bedside of his dying brother; and
the remembrance completed, if anything was needed
to complete, the impression. The fury that had
transfigured him seemed to pass away; his hand
loosed its hold on the weapon which he held. His
adversaries did not fail to use the opportunity.
They had been too genuinely frightened to let it slip
when it came. Indeed they may be excused for feeling
that this most formidable enemy had to be secured
against doing any more damage. The moment they
saw him unarmed they sprang with one movement
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>on him and overpowered him. Even then, if he had
offered resistance, they might have had no small
trouble, perhaps might have failed in securing him.
But he stood passive, and allowed his hands to be
bound without a struggle, and followed without
difficulty when he was led to the room where
offenders were commonly confined. Some of the
meaner spirits in the household were disposed to
visit their feelings of annoyance and humiliation on
his head, now that he seemed to be in their power.
But others felt a salutary dread of rousing the
sleeping lion whose rage they had seen could be so
terrible. Carna too did not abandon her <foreign lang="fr" rend='italic'>protegé</foreign>.
He was chained, indeed, to a staple in the wall of
the room which served as his prison. This seemed
nothing more than a necessary precaution. But the
girl let it be distinctly understood that no cruelty
must be used to him, and she took care herself that
his supply of food should be plentiful and good.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="21" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XXI. The Escape"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XXI. The Escape"/>
<head>CHAPTER XXI.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">THE ESCAPE.</hi></head>

<p>
The prisoner seemed to submit to his fate with
patience. He thanked the attendant who brought
him his rations with a nod and smile, and disposed
of the food with an appetite which seemed to
indicate a cheerful temper. A visit which the peddler
paid him the second day of his imprisonment
was apparently received as a welcome relief. The
two had a long and friendly conversation, nor did
Cedric utter a word of complaint against his treatment.
</p>

<p>
In reality the young chief was keeping under his
rage with an effort almost unbearably painful. That
he should be chained like a dog to the wall was an
intolerable grievance; he, a free man, and the son of
a long line of chiefs which boasted the blood of the
great Odin himself! The iron did indeed enter into
his soul, and the seeming calm of his outward
patience concealed a whole volcano of inward fury.
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>It was only the hope of freedom that kept him calm.
It was that he might not diminish this hope, this
almost desperate chance, by the very smallest fraction
that he ate and drank with such seeming cheerfulness.
He would want, he knew, all his strength for
an escape. He would support it and husband it to
the utmost.
</p>

<p>
And for an escape, unknown to his keepers, he was
steadily preparing. The chain which bound him to
the wall was fastened round his right arm and leg,
and the fastening would have seemed secure to any
ordinary observer. But such an observer would not
have made the necessary allowance for the young
man’s ordinary vigour and endurance. His hand
was large and muscular; far too much so, one would
have thought, to pass through the ring which had
been welded round the arms. But he possessed an
unusual power of contracting it. To exercise this
power was indeed a painful effort, causing something
like an agonizing cramp; still it was an effort that
could be made, and made without disabling the limb.
It could not, however, be done twice, because the
hand, recovering its shape from the extraordinary
pressure to which it had been subjected, would
infallibly swell. Cedric, accordingly, after satisfying
himself that it could be done, postponed actually
doing it till the moment of escape had arrived. The
fastening of the leg was less manageable. He
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>would not have scrupled to do as the Spartan prisoner
is said to have done, and cut off the foot which impeded
his escape, but he had positively nothing with
which this could be done. The only alternative was
to drag the staple from the wall, and to carry it
and the chain along with him. Fortunately, strong
as it was, it was light. The staple at first seemed
obstinate. It had indeed been subjected to tests
which satisfied the villa blacksmith of its capacity
of resistance. But repeated efforts, made with all
the enormous strength which the young giant could
bring to bear, weakened its hold, and at last it gave.
The prisoner was prudent enough not to complete
the separation of the iron from the walls. It would
have been difficult to replace it so as to escape the
notice of the attendant. Accordingly the drag was
relaxed as soon as the first indications of yielding
were felt. The time for attempting the escape was
a subject of much anxious deliberation. The obvious
course would have been to choose some hour between
midnight and dawn; but Cedric had heard from time
to time the step of some one walking up and down
before his prison, and he guessed that it might be
guarded at night, but left during the day-time, on the
presumption that the captive would scarcely make
an effort to escape while it was light. It was this
accordingly that he resolved to do. Shortly after
sunrise the attendant paid him his customary visit,
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>bringing with him the morning meal. Cedric pretended
to be but half awake, and, returning his salutation
in a mumbling, sleepy tone, turned again on his
side, as if to continue his slumbers. But the moment
after the man had left the room he was at work.
He dragged his hand through the ring, at the cost
of a pang which taxed his endurance to the utmost;
pulled the staple from the wall, wound the chain
round his leg, and wrenching away one of the iron
bars of the window, dropped through the opening
thus made on to the ground. His calculation was
correct. The ground was clear. Then another
question presented itself to him. Should he attempt to
escape as he was? He knew where a boat was commonly
kept, and it had been his plan to take this and
row out to sea in the hope of meeting some one of his
countrymen’s galleys. If he once got off from the
shore he was free, for if the worst came to the worst,
he could at least die as a free man should. But
should he go unarmed, and with the hampering chain
about his leg? A moment’s consideration—no more
was possible—decided him. He would make one
more bold effort. The forge was close at hand, and
he knew from having worked there that at that hour
in the morning it was commonly empty, the workmen
leaving it for their morning meal. There he could
find what he wanted, a file to release himself from
the chain, and a weapon.
</p>

<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>

<p>
The forge was empty, as he had expected. The
question was, How long would it remain so? The
workmen, he could see, had but just left it. The fire
had not died down to the lowest, showing that the
bellows had been recently at work, and a piece of iron
that had been left, half-wrought, on the anvil, was
still hot, as he could feel from putting his hand near
it. It might be safest to take a file and escape with
it at once. On the other hand, it would be far better
to release himself at once from his encumbrance, in
the event of having to run or fight for his life. He
might count, he thought, upon half an hour, and he
resolved to file away the chain then and there.
With admirable coolness he sat down and applied
all the strength and skill which he possessed to the
work, and had finished it in little more than half the
time which he had reckoned to have undisturbed.
He then caught up a sword which hung on one of
the walls. It was an old-fashioned weapon, but
Cedric, who knew good iron when it came in his way,
had tried its temper, and knew it to be capable of
doing good service.
</p>

<p>
So far everything had favoured him, nor did his
good fortune desert him now. He found the boat,
which was one commonly used for fishing by the
inmates of the villa, ready furnished with oars and a
small mast and sail. There were even, by good luck,
a small jar of water, some broken food in a hamper,
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>left by a party which had been using it the day before,
with some fishing lines. These, Cedric thought to
himself, might be useful if he failed to fall in with
any of his countrymen.
</p>

<p>
Jumping on board, he plied his sculls rapidly,
going in the direction of the sea, and keeping as
close under the shore as possible, so as to be out
of sight of the villa. As it happened, this precaution
was unnecessary. His absence was not
discovered till shortly afternoon, when the attendant,
bringing the midday meal, was astonished beyond
measure to find the room empty. But another danger
threatened him, a danger which he had not indeed
forgotten, but against which he had known it to be
impossible to take any precautions. This was the
chance of meeting with the Count’s squadron as it
was returning to the island; and it was this that he
actually encountered.
</p>

<p>
Just as he had reached the mouth of the Haven
and was turning his boat eastward, he saw within a
hundred yards of him one of the Roman galleys.
It was not the Count’s own vessel, for this had been
delayed by an accident to the rigging, and was
now many miles behind, but was in charge of the
second-in-command. The recognition was mutual.
Cedric’s tall figure was not one that could be easily
mistaken, nor could it be doubted that he was
attempting an escape. Had the Count been there
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>he would probably have parleyed with the fugitive.
The officer in command was not so considerate.
</p>

<p>
<q>Shoot,</q> he cried, <q>he is trying to escape,</q> and
as he spoke he seized a bow which lay on deck, and
took aim at the Saxon. His order was immediately
observed, and a shower of missiles was directed at
the boat. They all fell short, for Cedric had by this
time increased his distance. In a minute or two, however,
the ship was put about, and then began to gain
rapidly on the solitary rower.
</p>

<p>
Another volley was discharged, and this time one
of the arrows took effect, wounding the fugitive
slightly in the left arm. The situation was desperate.
To remain in the boat was to await certain death.
A third volley would unquestionably be fatal. Cedric
jumped overboard, but still clung to the side of the
boat. It was only just in time. The third volley
was discharged, and rattled on the upturned keel of
the boat so thick as to show plainly what the fate of
the occupant would have been. Still, though he had
escaped for the moment, Cedric’s fate seemed sealed.
The boat had given him shelter for the time, but to
go on clinging to it would be to ensure his capture.
He left it, and after making a few vigorous strokes,
threw up his arms from the surface of the water, and
uttering a loud cry, disappeared.
</p>

<p>
His quick eye had discerned a great mass of sea-weed
floating on the water about fifty yards away,
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>and his ready intelligence had seen a chance, small
indeed and almost desperate, but still a chance of
escape. Swimming under water to the sea-weed, he
was able to come to the surface and to take breath
under its shelter.
</p>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: Cedric’s Escape.]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><anchor id="fig222"/><figure url="images/i_253.jpg" rend="w100"><index index="fig" level1="Cedric’s Escape"/>
<head><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cedric’s Escape.</hi></head>
<figDesc>Cedric’s Escape</figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<p>
On board the galley every one of course supposed
him to have sunk. His action of the lifted arms
and the loud cry had been natural enough to deceive
the most wary observer. The boat was righted and
secured by a rope, and the galley pursued its way to
the villa, while Cedric was left to make the best of
his way to the land.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="22" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XXII. A Visitor"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XXII. A Visitor"/>
<head>CHAPTER XXII.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">A VISITOR.</hi></head>

<p>
The day after Cedric’s disappearance the Count
returned to the island. The prospect before him had
not by any means lightened. Britain, conquered,
oppressed, protected, for nearly four hundred years,
governed sometimes ill and sometimes well, according
to the varying characters of the Roman legates,
but never allowed to do anything for herself, was not
ready at a moment’s notice to be independent and
stand alone. The Count was much too shrewd a
man to hope that she would. Still, even he had not
realized how bad things would be; and when he
came to see them face to face he felt something like
disappointment, and even despair. A man will often
make up his mind to the general fact of failure, and
yet be almost as much vexed at the details of failure,
when it comes, as if he had expected success.
</p>

<p>
The fact was that the Count had found little or no
disposition in the native States to take up and carry
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>on the work which he was being compelled to give
up. They would make no sacrifices, or even efforts.
They refused to work together. Each reckoned on
its own chance of escaping the common danger, and
would not contribute to the defence that might
possibly be wanted for its neighbours, and not for
itself. Then jealousies and enmities, hitherto kept
in check by the strong hand of a master, began to
break out. The cities seemed likely, not only not to
combine against Picts and Saxons, but actually to go
to war among themselves. The Count felt all the
pain that comes to an honest and capable man when
he has to face the breaking up of a bad system which
he has inherited from predecessors less high principled
than himself. It happens very often that revolutions
come in the days, not of the worst offenders, but of
the men who are making sincere endeavours to do
their duty. And so it was with the Count.
</p>

<p>
It was in a very gloomy and depressed condition
of mind, therefore, that he returned to the villa. And
almost every day brought news of fresh troubles and
disasters. Some of the Roman houses scattered
through the country had been attacked and burnt of
late. Since the central authority had been weakened
the Roman residents had sometimes begun to behave
in a lawless and oppressive way to their British
neighbours, and these were taking their revenge with
the cruelty that is always natural to the oppressed.
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>Tragical tales of villas surrounded by infuriated
crowds of Britons, of masters and families shut up
within the walls, and perishing in the fires that consumed
them, were brought to the Count by the
scared survivors who had contrived to escape from
the general destruction.
</p>

<p>
The Count’s personal difficulties were considerable.
He had a considerable colony now settled
near the villa, and many of its members were helpless
and dependent people. The question of feeding
them would soon become an urgent one. At present
he could use the surplus stores which would no
longer be wanted now that his squadron had been so
reduced in strength. And there was another question
that pressed upon his mind—that of defence.
Already he had had to contract his operations.
With single pirate vessels, or even small squadrons
of two or three, he would be able to deal, but anything
stronger would have to be left alone. With the
few ships that were left to him it would be madness
to run any risk. And what, he could not help thinking,
if the Saxons were to attack the villa itself?
It had been built as a pleasure residence, and though
now fortified as far as circumstances permitted,
could not be held against a strong force. Should he
continue to occupy, or should he retire to the camp
of the Great Harbour, which would at least be a
more defensible position?
</p>

<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>

<p>
It may easily be imagined that these anxieties,
which had been troubling his thoughts during the
whole time of his absence, were not relieved when
he heard the story of what had happened during his
absence. He owed the Saxon more than he could
ever repay, for he shuddered to think what would
have happened to Carna but for his strength and
energy. And apart from this feeling of gratitude, he
admired the man’s splendid courage and tenacity.
He had even come to rely upon him for services of
unusual difficulty and danger. And now, to think
that he was lost to them by the stupid perversity
and jealousy of a set of slaves!
</p>

<p>
The said slaves had a bad time with their master
for some days after his return. Good-humoured and
kind as he was, yet he was a Roman—in other
words, he had inherited the lordly temper of a race
which had ruled the world for five hundred years,
and any contradiction that thwarted him in one of
his serious convictions or purposes, broke through
the veneer of refinement and culture that commonly
concealed the sterner part of his nature. A Christian
master could not crucify an offender—indeed, crucifixion
had been long since forbidden by the law—but
he had almost unlimited power over life and limb.
Life, indeed, the Count was too conscientious a
follower of his religion to touch, but he had no
scruple about going to the very utmost verge of
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>severity in the use of minor punishments. As for
his daughter, she was only too like her father to be
any check on his anger, and for the first time in her
life Carna found her mediation useless.
</p>

<p>
<q>Girl,</q> he said to her on one occasion, when she
had urged her intercession with tears, <q>you do not
know what mischief these foolish, cowardly knaves
have done. One thing I see plainly, that as soon as
ever the Saxons know the weakness of the position
we shall not be able to hold it any longer. There is
nothing to hinder them from coming and burning the
whole place over our heads; nothing in the way of
fortifications, and certainly nothing in the way of
garrison. They did not know all this before, but
they are sure to know it soon; and we shall see the
consequences before many months are over.</q>
</p>

<p>
In the course of the summer occurred an incident
which diverted the Count’s attention for a time,
though it did not lessen his perplexities.
</p>

<p>
One morning a small trading vessel entered the
haven near the villa. Her business, it was found,
was to land a stranger, who had bargained for a
passage to the island. The trader had come from a
port of Western Gaul, and had then taken her passenger
on board. Who he was the captain could
not say, except that he had the appearance of a
Roman gentleman. The day after they had set sail
an illness, which had evidently been upon him when
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>he came on board, had increased to such an extent
that he had lost consciousness. Two or three days
of delirium had been succeeded by stupor; in this
condition the unfortunate man still lay. But while
still conscious he had written down his destination,
and added an appeal to the compassion of his future
host. The Count read on the paper which the
merchant captain handed to him a few words written
in a trembling hand. They ran as follows:—
</p>

<p rend="margin-top:2 ; margin-bottom: 2">
<q><hi rend='italic'>In case I should not be able to speak for myself, I
invoke by these words the compassionate protection of the
Count Ælius. Let him not fear to receive me, but believe
that I am unfortunate rather than guilty, and that there
is between us the tie of a great common affection.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
The Count did not recognize the stranger, though
a dim impression of having seen him before floated
across his mind; and there was something in his
appearance which agreed with the trading captain’s
conviction that he was a man of birth and position.
In any case Ælius was not one who was inclined to
resist such an appeal to his compassion. The
stranger, still unconscious, was landed, together with
a few effects which were said to belong to him, and
at once handed over to the care of Carna. All her
diligence and watchfulness as a nurse, and all the
skill of the old physician, were wanted before the
patient could be brought back to life. For fourteen
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>days he lay hovering on the very verge of death,
mostly sunk in a stupor so complete that it was
barely possible to perceive either pulse or breath;
sometimes muttering in delirium a few broken sentences,
of which all that physician and nurse were
able to distinguish was that they were certainly
Latin, and that they seemed to be verse.
</p>

<p>
It was on the morning of the fifteenth day that
there came a change. Carna sat by the window of
the sick man’s room. It had a southern aspect, and
the sunshine came with a softened brilliance through
the thick tinted glass, and brought out the exquisite
tints of the girl’s glossy hair, as she sat bending over
the embroidery with which she was employing her
nimble, never-idle fingers.
</p>

<p>
<q>By heaven! another, fairer Proserpine!</q> said the
sick man.
</p>

<p>
The girl turned her head at the sound of the clearly
pronounced words which her practised ear distinguished
at once from the strained or blurred utterances
of delirium.
</p>

<p>
She held up her finger to her lips. <q>Do not speak,</q>
she said; <q>you have been very ill, and must not tire
yourself.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Lady,</q> said the sick man, with a smile, <q>you
must at least let me ask you where I am.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, you shall hear, if you will promise to ask no
more questions, but to be content with what you are
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>told. You are with friends, in the island of Vectis,
in the house of Ælius, Count of the Saxon Shore.
And now be quiet, and don’t spoil all our pains in
making yourself ill again.</q>
</p>

<p>
She gave him a little broth which was being kept
hot by the fire in readiness for the time when he
should recover consciousness; and after this had been
disposed of, and she had found by feeling his pulse
that he was free from fever, a small quantity of well
diluted wine.
</p>

<p>
<q>And now,</q> she said, <q>you must sleep</q>—a command
which he was ready enough to obey.
</p>

<p>
After this his recovery was rapid. For a time,
indeed, the cautious old physician, though he did not
forbid conversation, prohibited any reference to business.
<q>You will want, of course,</q> he said, <q>to tell
your story, and to make your plans for the future;
that will excite you, and, till you are stronger, may
bring about a relapse. Be content for a while with
the ladies’ company</q>—Ælia, now that no nursing had
to be done, was often with her foster-sister—<q>the
Count will see you when I give permission.</q>
</p>

<p>
And much talk the ladies had with him, and greatly
astonished they were at the variety and brilliance of
his conversation. He seemed equally familiar with
books and men. He had read everything—so at least
thought the two girls, who were sufficiently well
educated to recognize a full mind when they came
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>across it—he had been everywhere, he had seen
everybody. He never boasted of his intimacy with
great people, and indeed very seldom mentioned a
name, but his allusions showed that he was equally
familiar with courts and camps. It would have
puzzled more experienced persons than the sisters to
guess who this man of the world, who was also a man
of letters, could possibly be.
</p>

<p>
At the end of another week the physician removed
his prohibition, and the Count, who had hitherto
judged it better not to agitate his guest by his presence,
now paid a visit to his room.
</p>

<p>
After a few kindly inquiries as to his health, the
Count went on, <q>Understand me, sir, that I have no
wish to force any confidence from you. My good
fortune gave me the chance of serving you, but it has
not given me the right of asking you questions which
you might not care to answer. You are welcome to
my hospitality as long as you choose to remain here,
and you may command my help when you wish to go.
But of course, if you care to give me your confidence,
it may make the help a great deal more effective.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yours is a true hospitality,</q> answered the stranger,
with a smile, <q>but it is right that you should know
who I am, and how I came to be here; and I have
only been waiting for the good Strabo’s leave to tell
you. But may your daughter and her sister be
present? I have a sad story to relate, but there is
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>nothing in it which is unfit for them to hear, and
they have been good enough to show some interest
in an unhappy <anchor id="corr233"/><corr sic="(quote mark missing)">man.</corr></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>They shall come, if you wish it,</q> said the Count,
<q>indeed they have been almost dying of curiosity.</q>
</p>

<p>
It was to this audience that the stranger told his
story.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="23" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XXIII. The Stranger’s Story"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XXIII. The Stranger's Story"/>
<head>CHAPTER XXIII.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">THE STRANGER’S STORY.</hi></head>

<p>
<q>I have found out that my name is known to these
ladies, though they are not aware that it belongs to
me. You, sir, have very probably not found time
among your many cares to give any thought to the
trifles which, if I may say so much of myself, have
made me famous. I am Claudius Claudianus.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What! the poet!</q> cried the Count, <q>the Virgil
of these later days?</q>
</p>

<p>
The poet blushed with pleasure to hear the compliment,
which, extravagant as it may seem to us, did not
strike him as being anything out of the way. For had
not his statue been set up in Trajan’s Forum at Rome,
an honour which none of his predecessors had been
thought worthy to receive?
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah! sir,</q> he replied, <q>you are too good. But it
would have been well for me if I had contented myself
with following Virgil; unfortunately I must also
imitate Juvenal. Praise of the fallen may be
for<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>given, but there is no pardon for satire against those
that succeed. Enmity lasts longer than friendship,
and I have made enemies whom nothing can
appease.</q>
</p>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: Claudian’s Tale.]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><anchor id="fig234"/><figure url="images/i_267.jpg" rend="w100"><index index="fig" level1="Claudian’s Tale"/>
<head><hi rend='smallcaps'>Claudian’s Tale.</hi></head>
<figDesc>Claudian’s Tale</figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<p>
<q>But what of Stilicho?</q> said the Count. <q>Surely
he has not ceased to be your friend. Doubtless you
owe much to him, but he owes more, I venture to say,
to you. He may have given you wealth, but you
have given him immortality.</q><note place="foot">It may be as well to say a few words about Stilicho. He
was the son of a Vandal captain, and attracted by his skill and
courage the favourable notice of the Emperor Theodosius, who
gave him his niece Serena in marriage. His influence continued
to increase, and in course of time Theodosius made him and
his wife guardians of his young son Honorius, whom he shortly
afterwards proclaimed Augustus, and Emperor of the West.
In 394 Theodosius died, and the Empire was divided between
his two sons, Honorius taking the West and Arcadius the East.
Stilicho’s daughter Maria was now betrothed to Honorius, and
his influence continued to increase. He restored peace to the
Empire, conquering the Franks, chastising the Saxon pirates,
and driving back, it is said, the Picts and Scots from Britain by
the very terror of his name. For six years (398-404) he was
engaged in a struggle with Alaric, King of the Goths, over
whom he won, in the year 403, a great victory at Pollentia, near
the modern Turin, and whom he defeated again in the following
year under the walls of Verona. He is said to have conceived
the idea of securing the Empire for his own son, and for this
purpose to have entered into intrigues with his old enemy Alaric.
However this may be, it is certain that he fell into disgrace.
His end is related in this chapter. The poet Claudian employed
himself in writing the praises of Stilicho and invectives
against his rivals Rufinus and Eutropius.</note>
</p>

<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>

<p>
<q>Ah! sir,</q> said Claudian, <q>have you not then
heard?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Heard!</q> cried the Count; <q>we hear nothing
here. We always were cut off from the rest of the
world; but for the last nine months we might as well
have been living in the moon, for all that has reached
us of what is going on elsewhere.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You did not know, then, that Stilicho was dead?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Dead! But how?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Killed by the order of the Emperor.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What! killed? by the Emperor’s orders? It is
impossible. The man who saved the Empire, the very
best soldier we have had since Cæsar! And you
say that the Emperor ordered him to be killed?</q>
</p>

<p>
The Count rose from his seat, and walked about in
incontrollable emotion.
</p>

<p>
<q>So they have killed him! Fools and madmen
that they are! There never was such a man. I
knew him well. He was always ready, always cheerful,
as gay in a battle as at a wedding; as brave as a
lion, and yet never doing anything by force that he
could contrive by stratagem. But tell me—they
had, or pretended to have, some cause. What was
it?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>They said he was a traitor, that he wanted the
Empire for himself, or for his son, that he intrigued
with the barbarians.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, he was fond of power; and who can wonder
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>that he was dissatisfied when he saw in what hands
it was lodged? But tell me—what do you think?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I don’t say,</q> resumed Claudian, <q>that he was
blameless, but he had an impossible task—he had
to save the Empire without soldiers. He did it
again and again; he played off one barbarian power
against another with consummate skill; and filled his
legion one day with the enemies whom he had routed
the day before. But this could not be done without
intrigues, without devices which, taken by themselves,
looked like treason. But it is idle to speak
of the past. He lies in a dishonoured grave, and the
Empire of Augustus is tottering to its fall.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Tell me of his end,</q> said the Count. <q>You
saw it?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes,</q> said the poet; <q>I saw it, and, I am
ashamed to say, survived it. Well, I will tell you
my tale. You know he might have had the Empire;
the soldiers offered it to him; Alaric and his Goths
would have been delighted to help him. But he
refused. He was loyal to the last. He would not
even fly. There are many places where he would
have been safe——</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes,</q> interrupted the Count; <q>he would have
been safe here, if I know anything of Britain.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, he would go to none of them. He went
to the one place where safety was impossible. He
went to Ravenna; and at Ravenna every one, from
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>the Emperor down to the meanest slave, was an
enemy. He wanted to make them trust him by
trusting them—as if one disarmed a tiger by going
into his lair! He had two or three of his chief
officers with him, besides myself, and as many
slaves. We had not a weapon of any kind among
us. Stilicho made a point of our being unarmed.
Well, we had not an encouraging greeting when we
entered the city. Every one, as you may suppose,
recognized him. Indeed, there was no man, I suppose,
in the whole Empire, who was better known.
No one who had ever seen Stilicho could forget that
towering form, that white head.<note place="foot"><lg><l><q rend="post: none">Stilichonis apex et cognita fulsit</q></l>
<l><q rend="pre: none">Canities.</q></l></lg>

<q>There shone Stilicho’s towering head and well-known
locks of white</q>—a passage quoted from Claudian by
D’Israeli, with exquisite propriety, in his eulogium on the
Duke of Wellington, in the House of Commons, November,
1852.</note> There were sullen
looks as we walked through the streets, and hisses,
and even some stone throwing. However, we got
safe to our lodgings, and passed the night without
disturbance. The next day, as we were standing in
the market-place, an old Vandal soldier—one of the
general’s countrymen, you know—put a flower in his
hand as he walked by, without saying a word, or
even looking at him; for it would have been as much
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>as his life was worth to be seen communicating with
us. <q>An old comrade,</q> said Stilicho, who never
forgot a face. <q>He served with me in Greece.</q> The
flower was a little red thing; the <q>shepherd’s hourglass</q>
they call it, because it shuts when there is
rain coming. It was a warning. There was danger
close at hand. The general said, <q>We must take
sanctuary.</q> Then he called me to him. <q>Leave me,
Claudian,</q> he said; <q>you cannot take sanctuary with
us, for you are not a baptized man. I do not count
much on the Church’s protection; but still it may
give me time to make my defence to the Emperor.
So you must look out for your own safety. But
surely they can’t be base enough to harm you, for
what you have done?</q> <q>I don’t know about that, my
Lord,</q> I answered; <q>you remember the fable of the
trumpeter.<note place="foot">In one of Æsop’s fables, a trumpeter, taken prisoner, begs
for his life, pleading that he has never struck a blow in battle;
but is told that he has done much worse in encouraging others
to fight by his martial music.</note> Anyhow, I shall follow you as far as I
can.</q> Well, he went into the great church—what
used to be the Basilica before Constantine’s time—and
took sanctuary by the altar. I did not go further
than the nave. In the course of an hour or so comes
the bishop, with the archdeacon and two or three
priests, and following them one of the great officers
of the Court, with a body-guard. The church was
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>now crowded from end to end; the people had
climbed up into the pulpit, and every accessible
spot from which they could get a view of what was
going on. I think that there was a reaction in the
general’s favour. No one, whose heart was not flint,
could see the man who had saved the Empire, and
that not once or twice, a suppliant for his life.
Well, I could not see for myself what went on, but
I heard the story afterwards. The bishop brought a
safe-conduct from the Emperor; or rather the
chamberlain brought it, and the bishop gave it to
Stilicho, with his own guarantee. I can’t believe
that a man of peace and truth, as he calls himself,
could have been a party to so base a fraud—he must
have been deceived himself. Well, the safe-conduct
promised that the general should be heard in his
own defence; and he wanted nothing more. I doubt
whether a trial would have served him; but they
never intended to give him even so much. As soon
as he was out of the church I could see what was
meant, for I followed him. The chamberlain’s body-guard
drew their swords. Well, I was wrong to say
that he had no friends in Ravenna. He had a friend
even in that crew of hirelings—another of his old
soldiers, I daresay. I told you that Stilicho had
neither armour nor weapon. Well, in a moment, no
one could see how, there was a long sword lying at
his feet. He took it up; and, verily, if he had used
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>it, he would at least have sold his life dearly. The
general was a great swordsman, as good a swordsman
as he was a general. But no; he would not
condescend to it; after a soldier’s first impulse to
take the weapon, he made no use of it. He pointed
it to the ground, and stood facing his enemies. Ah!
it was a noble sight—that grand old man looking
steadfastly at that crew of murderers. For a few
moments they seemed cowed. No one lifted his
hand—then some double-dyed villain crept behind
and stabbed him. He staggered forward, and immediately
there were a dozen swords hacking at
him. At least his was no lingering death. They
cut off that grand white head and carried it to the
Emperor; his body they threw into the pit where
they bury the slaves. And that was the end of the
saviour of the Empire.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And about yourself?</q> said the Count.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well,</q> went on the poet, <q>I have since thought
that if I had been a man I should have died with him.
But when I knew that he was dead, I was coward
enough to fly. You would not care to hear how I
spent the next few days. I had a few gold pieces in
my pocket, and I found a wretched lodging in one of
the worst parts of the city, and I lay there in hiding.
One day I was having my morning meal at a wine
shop, when a shabbily dressed old man, who sat next,
turned to me in a meaning way, and, pouring a few
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>drops out of his wine cup, said, <q>To Apollo and the
Muses.</q> That is a crime now-a-days, in some places
at least, Ravenna among them; and he wanted, I
suppose, to put me at my ease. <q>Will you not do
the same,</q> he went on, <q>of all men in the world there
is no one who has better cause.</q> Pardon me, illustrious
Count, if I repeat his flatteries. <q>Whom do
you take me for?</q> said I, for one gets to be a sad
coward after a few days’ hiding, and I was unwilling
to declare myself. He replied by repeating some of
my verses in so meaning a way that I could not misunderstand
him. <q>These wine-bibbers here,</q> he went
on, <q>don’t know one verse from another, but they
might catch up a name. Come along with me; I will
give you a flask of something better than this sour
stuff.</q> Well, we went to his house, which was close
to the harbour. He was the owner, I found, of two
or three small trading vessels. The house was a veritable
temple of the Muses, ornamented with busts of
the poets—my own I was flattered to see among them—and
containing an excellent library of books.
Manlius—that was my friend’s name—had heard me
recite at Rome; and he recognized me partly from
memory, partly from my resemblance to the bust.
To make a long story short, he entertained me most
hospitably for several days, while we discussed the
question what was to become of me. Home I could
not go, not, at least, till there should be a change in
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>the Emperor’s surroundings. The further I got from
Italy the more chance there would be of safety. We
thought of North-western Gaul or Britain, or of
getting across the Rhine. The end of it was that
the good fellow took me across Italy, disguised as his
servant, to Genoa, where he had correspondents.
From Genoa I went to Marseilles, and from Marseilles
overland to Narbonne, using now the character
of a bookseller’s agent, one which I thought myself
better qualified to sustain than any other. At
Narbonne I found employment as a bookseller’s
assistant, till I could get a letter from my wife in
Africa with some money. That came in due course,
and then I set off on my travels again, still working
northwards. Then, sir, I thought of you. I had
often heard the great man speak of you. You served
under him against the Bastarnæ,<note place="foot">A tribe that occupied a region included in what is now
known as Russian Poland.</note> I think, and it
occurred to me that for Stilicho’s sake you might give
me shelter. Not that it matters much to me. To
Stilicho I owe so much that I can scarcely imagine
life without him. He gave me honour, wealth, even,</q>
added the poet, with a sad little smile, <q>even my
wife, for it was not my courting, but the Lady
Serena’s<note place="foot">Serena was wife to Stilicho, and, as has been said before,
niece to the Emperor Theodosius.</note> letter that won her for me. But to go on,
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>I found an honest trader, and bargained with him to
bring me here. I had been sickening for some time,
and I remember little or nothing from the time of my
embarking. There, sir, you have my history carried
up to the latest point.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>We will put off the future to another day,</q> said
the Count; <q>meanwhile you may count on me for
anything that I can do.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Your kindness does much to reconcile me to life,</q>
said the poet, <q>and now I will retire, for I feel a
little tired.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah,</q> said Carna half to herself, when he had
left the room, <q>now I understand about Proserpine.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>About Proserpine? What do you mean?</q> asked
Ælia.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, when he came to himself for the first time
I was sitting in the window with a piece of embroidery
work in my hand, and I heard him whisper something
about Proserpine.</q> Carna suppressed the flattering
epithet. <q>Don’t you remember that passage where
he describes the tapestry which Proserpine was working
for her mother, and how we admired it, and
thought we would work something of the kind for
ourselves, only we could not get any design?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, I remember,</q> replied the other, <q>and you
have had a Pluto, too, to carry you off. Luckily he
was not so successful as the god.</q>
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="24" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XXIV. News from Italy"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XXIV. News from Italy"/>
<head>CHAPTER XXIV.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">NEWS FROM ITALY.</hi></head>

<p>
The Count’s difficulties did not seem to diminish as
the year advanced. Money grew scarcer and scarcer,
till it was only by pledging his personal credit to the
merchants of Londinium and other towns in Britain
that he was able to find the pay for the crews of his
little squadron. His credit happily was still good, a
character of twenty years without a single suspicion
on his integrity standing him in good stead. Then a
disaster happened to one of the few ships that he had
retained. After a fierce encounter with a Saxon galley,
in which its crew had been much weakened, it had been
caught in a storm and driven on the deadly western
shore of the island, still dreaded under the name of
the Needles by those who navigate the Channel.
The ship became a complete wreck and only a small
portion of the crew escaped with their lives, all the
disabled men being lost.
</p>

<p>
But the Count’s chief perplexities were within
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>rather than without. For more than twenty years
he had yielded an unquestioning obedience to the
authorities at home. It is true that very little had
been demanded of him. He had been given a free
hand, and left to do his duty with very little interference,
if with very little help. But now in the news
of Stilicho’s death his loyalty had received a tremendous
shock. How was he to bear himself to a ruler
who was capable of committing so great a crime?
True, he knew enough of the Emperor to be sure
that he was only a tool in the hands of others, but
this did not make the matter one whit better. Such
tools are often more mischievous than men who are
actively wicked. What then was he to do? Should
he join the usurper Constantine, of whose astonishing
success in Gaul and Spain he had heard the most
glowing reports? His pride forbad it—an Ælius
doing homage to a man who but twelve months
before had been a private soldier! The thought was
impossible. Should he retire into private life? But
would not that be to shirk his duty, not to mention
the fact that to retire is the one thing which in
troubled times a man in a conspicuous position cannot
do. One thing, indeed, was evident—that a
decision would have to be made speedily. His position
was rapidly becoming untenable, and he would
have to make up his mind, without much delay,
as to the best way of getting out of it. In the end
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>it happened to him as it happens to so many of us,
that his mind was made up for him.
</p>

<p>
One day, towards the end of August, he was about
to seek in a day’s sport a little relief from his many
cares. It was still about four hours to noon, and he
was sitting under a cherry tree (one of his own planting)
in the villa garden, and sharing a slight meal of
milk and wheaten cakes with his daughter and Carna,
both of whom he had persuaded to accompany him.
A young Briton stood by holding in a leash a couple
of dogs very much like the greyhounds of our own
times; another carried a bow and a quiver; a third
had a game bag of leather, with a netted front, slung
across his shoulders.
</p>

<p>
The sailing-master of one of the galleys approached
and saluted.
</p>

<p>
<q>There is a galley,</q> he said, <q>coming up the
Haven, and I thought that you should know at once,
since it seems to have something of importance on
board.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What makes you think so?</q> said the Count.
</p>

<p>
<q>I have been watching it for the last hour,</q> said
the man. <q>At first I thought it was a little trading
vessel; but I noticed that as soon as it entered the
Haven it hoisted the Labarum.</q><note place="foot">The Imperial standard (see page 21).</note>
</p>

<p>
<q>The Labarum!</q> exclaimed the Count; <q>I have
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>not seen that flying from any mast but my own for a
year past. Well, that ought to mean something.</q>
</p>

<p>
It was the etiquette to go as far as was possible to
meet an Imperial messenger, just as a host receives
a very distinguished guest on his door-step, and the
Count, after hastily exchanging his hunting-dress for
a toga, went to the little pier at which the galley
would land its passenger. He had not to wait many
minutes before it arrived, and a handsome young
man, with a short military cloak over his traveller’s
dress, leapt lightly ashore. The Count saluted. The
stranger, who was for a time the representative of
the Emperor, received the greeting with the dignified
gesture of a superior.
</p>

<p>
<q>Do I address Lucius Ælius, Count of the
Saxon Shore?</q> he asked.
</p>

<p>
<q>I am he,</q> the Count briefly replied.
</p>

<p>
<q>I bring the commands of Augustus,</q> said the
messenger, producing from a pocket in his tunic a
vellum roll, bound with a broad purple cord, and
bearing the Imperial seal.
</p>

<p>
The Count received the missive with a profound
inclination, and put it to his lips. At the same time
the messenger uncovered, and changed his haughty
demeanour for the behaviour usual to a young officer
in the presence of his superior.
</p>

<p>
<q>It will be more respectful and more convenient
to read his Majesty’s gracious communication in
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>private. Will you please come with me to my
house?</q>
</p>

<p>
He led the way to the villa, and introduced the
visitor into the little room which he used for the
transaction of business. He then cut with his dagger
the purple cord which fastened the package containing
the despatch, and, after again putting the document
to his lips, proceeded to read it. Its contents were
seemingly not agreeable, for his face darkened as he
went on. He made no remark, however, beyond
simply asking the messenger—
</p>

<p>
<q>May I presume that you have a general acquaintance
with the contents of this document?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have,</q> replied the young man.
</p>

<p>
<q>Then you will know that the answer is not one
which can be given in a moment. But,</q> and he
went on with a rapid change of voice and manner,
<q><foreign lang="la" rend='italic'>cras seria</foreign>.<note place="foot">Business to-morrow.</note> I was just on the point of going out
for a few hours’ hunting when your arrival was
announced. Will you come with me? I have
nothing very great to show you, though we have
some big game here too, if we had time to look for
it, but if you will condescend to anything so small
as hare-hunting, I can show you some sport.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Imperial messenger was an Italian of the
north of the Peninsula, who had been fond of
fol<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>lowing the chase on the slopes of the Apennines
before chance had made him a courtier. He accepted
the invitation with pleasure, and the party made the
best of their way to the high ground now known as
Arreton Downs.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah!</q> said the Count, as he pointed northward
to where the great Anderida Forest<note place="foot">The Forest of Anderida occupied a great part of Hampshire
and nearly the whole of Sussex, except a strip of land along the
coast. It must have measured a hundred miles from east to
west.</note> might be seen
stretching far beyond the range of sight, <q>there is
the place for sport; a wilder country I have never
seen, no, nor finer game. There are wild boars of
which I have never seen the like in Italy, no, nor in
the Hercynian Wood<note place="foot">The Black Forest, part of which was known to the Romans.</note> itself, where I used to hunt
years ago. Last year I killed one which measured
six feet from snout to tail. There are wolves, too,
and bears, and wild oxen; splendid fellows these last,
as fierce as lions, and almost as big as elephants.
But to-day we must be content with humbler sport.</q>
</p>

<p>
This humbler game, however, afforded plenty of
amusement, and they returned with a bag of eight
fine hares—a very fair burden for the carrier of the
game-bag—and an excellent appetite for dinner.
</p>

<p>
The meal, to which the Count had invited the
captains of his galleys and the principal persons in
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>the little colony which was now gathered about the
villa, passed off very well. The young Italian was
loud in his praises of everything. <q>Your oysters,</q>
he said, <q>all the world knows, but some of your
other dishes are a surprise. The turbot, for instance,
how incomparably superior to the flabby and tasteless
things which they bring us from our own
coasts. The colder water of the seas is, I suppose,
the cause. The hares, too, how fine and fleshy!
You seem to be amazingly well off in the way of food
in this corner of the world.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah!</q> said the Count, with a sigh, <q>we should
do very well, if the rest of the world would only
leave us alone. But our neighbours cannot be content
without a share of some of our good things,
and they have a very rough and disagreeable way of
asking for it.</q>
</p>

<p>
The speaker went on to draw for the benefit of his
guest a vivid picture of the trouble which the Saxons
were giving by sea and the Picts by land, till the
Italian exclaimed—
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah! I see that you too have your disagreeables.
I began to think that this was a land of peace and
plenty, where one might find a pleasant refuge. But
these barbarians, in one shape or another, are everywhere.
We are fallen upon evil times indeed.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes,</q> said the Count, <q>evil times, and no one
knows how to deal with them; and if God does
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>send us a capable man, we treat him as if he were
an enemy.</q>
</p>

<p>
When the tables had been cleared, the Count rose
and proposed the toast of the Emperor’s health; but
he did this without a single word of compliment, a
significant omission that did not fail to attract the
attention of all who were present. He then proceeded,
and again without any preface, to read to the company
the despatch which had been put into his hands
the day before. It ran thus:
</p>

<p rend="margin-top: 2">
<q rend="post: none"><hi rend="italic">Flavius Honorius Augustus to the faithful and
valiant Lucius Ælius, Count of the Saxon Shore,
greeting.</hi></q>
</p>

<p rend="margin-bottom: 2">
<q><hi rend="italic">Our Imperial care for the dominions, which by
Divine Providence have been committed to our trust, bids
us combine the safety of the seat of our government with
the welfare of the provinces. For, seeing that these are
mutually related, as are the head and the limbs in the
body of man, it is manifest that neither can prosper
without the other. Our well-beloved and faithful province
of Britain has now for many generations been protected
by our invincible legions and fleets. But even as there
comes a time when the most careful fathers judge it to be
not only needless but even harmful to keep their children in
dependence upon themselves, so do we now judge that our
province may now with great advantage, not only to us—for
of this we think little—but also to itself, defend itself
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>with its own resources. We charge you, therefore, our
well-beloved and faithful Ælius, as having supreme
command of the fleets of the said province of Britain, to
withdraw them as soon as you conveniently may, but not
without leaving our loyal subjects the assurance of our
fatherly love and of the unfailing protection of our
majesty. The Ever-Blessed Trinity keep and prosper
both you and all that are committed to your charge.
Given at Ravenna, the twelfth day before the Kalends of
August,<note place="foot">July 21st.</note> in the year of our Lord 408, and the fifteenth
year of our reign.</hi></q>
</p>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: The Count receiving the letter of Honorius.]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><anchor id="fig252"/><figure url="images/i_287.jpg" rend="w100"><index index="fig" level1="The Count receiving the letter of Honorius"/>
<head><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Count receiving the letter of Honorius.</hi></head>
<figDesc>The Count receiving the letter of Honorius</figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<p>
The reading of the despatch was followed by a
dead silence. Every one had felt for some time that
the present state of affairs could not last. Only a
man of the vigorous character of the Count, and having
long years of excellent service to fall back upon,
could have maintained it so long, but it was impossible
not to see that it must soon end. A solitary
commander, without resources or support, could not
maintain himself on the remotest borders of the
Empire. Yet to know that the moment for the
change had come was disturbing. The fleet, reduced
as it had been to a petty squadron, was still, while it
remained, the symbol of Imperial power, and seemed
to be worth more in the way of protection than
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>it really was. When this was withdrawn, Britain
would be really left to itself; and this prospect, however
it might be regarded elsewhere, was not
agreeable to any one of the Count’s guests.
</p>

<p>
The Count was the first to break the silence.
<q>This,</q> he said, <q>is manifestly a matter that calls
for serious thought. Let us postpone it till to-morrow,
and for the present turn ourselves to
matters more suitable for a festive occasion. Perhaps
my friend Claudian will give us the recitation
of something with which he has already charmed
the ears of our fellow-countrymen elsewhere.</q>
</p>

<p>
The poet, not more reluctant than his brother-countryman
to exhibit his genius, at once signified
his willingness to comply with this request, and gave
a recitation from an unfinished poem which he had
then in hand. We may give a specimen, put into
the best English that we can command—
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend="post: none">The elemental order there she drew,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And Jove’s high dwellings; there you saw</l>
<l>The needle tell how ancient Chaos grew</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>To harmony and law;</l>
</lg><lg>
<l><q rend="post: none">How Nature set in order due and rank</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Her atoms, raised the light on high,</l>
<l>And to the middle place the weightier sank;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>There lustrous shone the sky,</l>

</lg><lg>

<l><q rend="post: none">The heavens were pink with flame, the ocean rolled,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The great world hung in mid suspense.</l>
<l>Each was of diverse hue; she worked in gold</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The starry fires intense,</l>
</lg>

<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>

<lg>
<l><q rend="post: none">Bade ocean flow in purple, and the shore</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With gems upraised. Divinely wrought,</l>
<l>The threads embossed to swelling billows bore</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Strange likeness; you had thought</l>

</lg><lg>
<l><q rend="post: none">They dashed the seaweed on the rocks, or crept</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hoarse murmuring thro’ the thirsty sands.</l>
<l>Five zones, she added. In mid place she kept</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>With red distinct the lands</l>

</lg><lg>
<l><q rend="post: none">Leaguered with burnings; all the region showed</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scorched into blackness, and the thread</l>
<l>Dry as with sunshine that eternal glowed;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'><anchor id="corr255"/><corr sic="Or">On</corr> either hand were spread</l>

</lg><lg>
<l><q rend="post: none">The realms of life, lapt in a milder breath</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Kindly to men; and next appear,</l>
<l>On this extreme and that, dull lands of death:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>She made them dark and drear</l>

</lg><lg>
<l><q rend="post: none">With year-long frost, and saddened all the hue</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With endless winter; last she showed</l>
<l>What seats her sire’s grim brother holds; nor knew</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'><q rend="pre: none">The fated dark abode.</q><note place="foot">This is the translation of a passage from the first book of an
unfinished poem by Claudian, entitled <foreign lang="la" rend='italic'>De Raptu Proserpinæ</foreign>,
<q>The Carrying off Proserpine.</q> It is an amplification of the
legend that Pluto, god of the region of the dead, carried off
Proserpine, daughter of Ceres, to be his wife and queen, while
she was gathering flowers in the fields of Enna in Sicily. The
passage translated occurs in the first book, and describes the
tapestry with which Proserpine is busy, as a gift to her absent
mother. The poem breaks off in the third book, while relating
the search which the mother makes for her lost daughter.</note></l>
</lg>

</div><div type="chapter" n="25" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XXV. Consultation"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XXV. Consultation"/>
<head>CHAPTER XXV.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">CONSULTATION.</hi></head>

<p>
The next morning the Count invited the Imperial
messenger to a private conference. His daughter
and Carna were present, as was also Claudian.
</p>

<p>
<q>You have the latest news,</q> the Count began.
<q>Pray let us have them. Here we know nothing.
But tell us first how you got here. It was noticed
that you did not hoist the standard till you were
within the Haven. You did not, I suppose, think it
a safe flag to sail under.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well,</q> replied the messenger, <q>I thought it
better to have no flag at all. But, to tell the truth,
the Labarum is not just now exactly the best passport
in the world.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You crossed from Gaul, I suppose?</q> the Count
went on. <q>How are matters there?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Constantine, with the legions he brought from
here, and those that have joined him since, is pretty
well master of the country, and of Spain too.</q>
</p>

<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>

<p>
<q>And what is the Emperor doing? Did he let
these provinces go without a struggle? Spain was
the first province that Rome ever had, and Gaul was
the second. None, I take it, have been so steadily
profitable, and now we are to lose them.</q>
</p>

<p>
He rose from his seat, and walked up and down
the room in an agitation which he could not conceal.
</p>

<p>
<q>And the only man who could keep the Empire together
is gone; butchered, as if he were a criminal!</q>
</p>

<p>
The messenger said nothing to this outburst. He
went on, <q>I believe his Majesty proposes to admit
Constantine to a share of the Imperial honours, to
make him Cæsar of Gaul and Spain.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What!</q> said the Count. <q>Do not my ears
deceive me? This fellow, whom I have seen wearing
the collar for the neglect of duty, recognized as
his colleague by Augustus!</q><note place="foot">This was actually done about this time, and with the result
foreshadowed in the conversation given above.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q>I do not pretend to know his Majesty’s purposes,
I can only say what is reported at head-quarters,
and, it would seem, on good authority. But,</q> continued
the speaker, in a voice from which he had
studiously banished all kind of emphasis, and looking
as he spoke at the ceiling of the room, <q>your lordship
is aware that the honours thus unexpectedly
bestowed do not always turn out to the advantage
of those who receive them.</q>
</p>

<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>

<p>
<q>What do you mean?</q> asked the Count.
</p>

<p>
<q>I mean that what is given may be taken away—and
taken away with very handsome interest for the
loan—when the proper time comes. Your lordship
has not forgotten the name of Carausius.</q><note place="foot">Carausius had held, towards the end of the third century,
the same command as that of the Count of the Saxon Shore,
had rebelled against the Emperor, made himself master of
Britain and all the Western Seas, and had then proclaimed himself
Augustus. The Emperor Diocletian made several attempts to
reduce him, but, finding that this could not be done, acknowledged
him as a partner in the Empire. Six years later
Carausius was murdered by one of his lieutenants, Allectus,
who doubtless hoped thus to bring himself into favour at Rome.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well,</q> said the Count, <q>this is not the old way
Rome had of dealing with her enemies. But, <q>other
times, other manners.</q> Tell me now, if the Augustus
has arranged or is going to arrange with Constantine,
what about Alaric?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! he will be quiet for a time, or should be, if
there is any truth in a barbarian’s oath. You have
heard how he marched on Rome?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, indeed,</q> replied the Count. <q>I have heard
nothing here, except, quite early in the year, a vague
rumour that he was on the move again. But tell
me—has Augustus given <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>, too, a share in the
Empire?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Not exactly; but I will tell what has taken place.
He marched on Rome.</q>
</p>

<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>

<p>
<q>Yes,</q> interjected the Count, <q>and there was no
Stilicho to save it!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The city was almost helpless. Even the walls had
not been kept in repair, and if they had, there was no
proper force to man them. The only thing possible
was to make peace on the best terms that they could.
I happened to be in Alaric’s camp with a letter, under
a flag of truce, the very day that the ambassadors
came out to treat with the king, and I saw the whole
affair. I don’t mind saying that it was not one to
make a man feel proud of being a Roman. The barbarians,
it seemed to me, had not only all the strength
on their side, but the dignity also. Alaric himself
is a splendid specimen of humanity, every inch a
king, the tallest and handsomest man in his army,
and that, too, an army of giants. It was a
contrast, I can tell you, between him and the two
miserable, pettifogging creatures that represented
the Senate. At first they tried what a little brag
could do. <q>Give us an honourable peace,</q> said their
spokesman, <q>or you will repent of having driven to
despair a nation of warriors, a nation that has conquered
the world.</q> The king laughed; he knew what
the Romans have come to. <q>The thicker the hay,</q> he
said, <q>the easier to mow.</q> And then he fixed the
ransom that he would take for retiring from before
the walls. Brennus throwing his sword into the
scales was moderation in comparison to him. <q>Give
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>me,</q> he said, <q>all the gold and silver, coined or uncoined,
private property or public that you have, and
all the other property that the envoys whom I shall
send think worth taking; and hand over to me all
the slaves that you have of the nations of the North,
Goths, or Huns, or Vandals. You are pleased to call
them barbarians, but they are more fit to be masters
than you; and I will not suffer them to be in a bondage
so unworthy. Your Greeks, and Africans, and
Asiatics, and such like cattle you may keep.</q> The
ambassadors were pale with dismay. If they had
taken back such an answer, the Romans had at
least enough spirit left to tear them in pieces. <q>What
do you leave us, then?</q> they said. <q>Your lives!</q> he
thundered out. In the end, however, he softened
somewhat. Five thousand pounds of gold and thirty
thousand pounds of silver, and I don’t know how
much silk, and cloth, and spices, were what he finally
asked. I know the city was stripped pretty bare
before the Senate could make up the sum. I am
told that the treasuries of the churches had to be
emptied. Well, as I said, Alaric, if he keeps his
bargain, ought to be quiet for a time, but you will
see that the Emperor has need of all his friends
round him, and all the strength which he can bring
together. That is what I have to say by way of
explanation of the despatch that I brought.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>May I ask you to leave us for a while?</q> said the
Count to the young Italian.
</p>

<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>

<p>
When he had left the room the Count turned to
his daughter, and said—
</p>

<p>
<q>And this is our country! This is Rome! The
Emperor, forsooth, has need of all his friends. His
friends indeed! I little thought that the day would
come when I should feel ashamed of the title. But
tell me, daughter; what shall we do? Shall we
go?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What else can we do?</q> asked the girl.
</p>

<p>
<q>I have thought much about the matter since I
heard the dreadful news of Stilicho’s death, and have
had all kinds of wild schemes in my head. I have
felt that I could not go back and touch in friendship
the hands that murdered him. Sometimes I thought,
while Cedric was here, that we would take him with
us, and sail eastward. I have had many a hard fight
with these Saxons, but at least they are men, and
brave men, too, who are true to their friends, if they
hate their enemies. But that is now at an end. But
is there no other way to go? What say you, Claudian—have
you any counsel to give us?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I would not advise you to sail eastward,</q> said the
poet. <q>We know pretty well what lies that way; tribes
of barbarians, of whom the less we see the better,
with all respect to your friend Cedric, who seems to
have been a fine fellow. But why not westward?
You will laugh at me for believing in the Islands of
the Blest. Well, I do not mean to say that there is
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>a country where Achilles and the rest of the heroes
are living in immortal joy and peace. If there is, it
is not one which any ship, built by the art of man,
can reach. But I do believe that there is a country.
These old tales, depend upon it, have something more
in them than mere fancy. Why, my lord, should
not you be the one to find it?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, let us go, dear father,</q> said Ælia, <q>and
leave this dreadful world with all its troubles and
quarrels behind us. Don’t you think so, Carna?</q>
</p>

<p>
Carna only smiled sadly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Or,</q> continued the poet, <q>there is the land
beyond the north, the country of the blessed Hyperboreans,
that old Herodotus talks about. Why
should we not go there? Or, if that sounds too
wild, there is Africa, with regions rich and fertile
beyond all doubt that are waiting to be explored.
These at least are no matter of legend. We know
where they are. Let us search for them. Whatever
world we may find, it can hardly be worse than that
which we are leaving behind.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And what says Carna?</q> said the Count, turning,
with an affectionate look, to his adopted daughter.
</p>

<p>
The girl thus appealed to flushed painfully. For
a moment she seemed about to speak, but not a
syllable passed her lips.
</p>

<p>
<q>Speak,</q> cried the Count; <q>you always see
clearer and farther than the rest of us.</q>
</p>

<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>

<p>
<q>My father,</q> the girl went on, <q>I will speak from
my heart, as I know you always wish me to do.
Forgive me if I seem to teach when it is my part to
learn and to obey. But, if you ask what I think you
should do, I say, <q>Go home to Rome or Ravenna, or
wherever else the Emperor bids you.</q> After all, it is
your country, and it never needed the help of good
and brave men more than it does now.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>By heaven! Claudian,</q> cried the Count, after
a brief silence, <q>the girl is right, as she always is.
These are not the times for an honest man to turn
his back upon his country. If I could reach the
Islands of the Blest, or the happy people who live
beyond the north, as easily as I can walk across this
room, I would not do it; and after all, what is the
world without Rome to a Roman? What say you,
Claudian?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I am but a poor singer, who has lost all that
made him sing. I could do little in any case, and I
doubt whether those who killed Stilicho will have
anything but the axe for Stilicho’s friend. Still, I go
with you. It is not for a Roman to say that Rome
is unworthy.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>So that is settled,</q> exclaimed the Count.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, Carna,</q> cried Ælia, throwing her arms round
her sister, <q>shall we ever be as happy again as we
have been in this dear place?</q>
</p>

<p>
Carna clung to her, and sobbed as if her heart
would break.
</p>

<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>

<p>
<q>Does it trouble you so much to go?</q> asked the
Count. <q>Surely the place is not so much to you.
You can be happy, wherever you may be, with those
you love.</q>
</p>

<p>
The girl lifted up a tear-stained face to him.
</p>

<p>
<q>Father,</q> she said—<q>more than father, for you
have loved me without any tie of kindred—I cannot
go, my home is here.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nay, child, what are you saying? Your home
has been with us ever since you were a babe in arms,
and it is so still; or,</q> he added, with a smile, <q>are
you going to leave us for a husband?</q>
</p>

<p>
The girl blushed crimson as she shook her head.
When she could recover her speech, choked, as it
was, with sobs, she said—
</p>

<p>
<q>You asked me just now what you should do, and
I said <q>Go home to your country.</q> Can I do less myself?
Rome is your country, and Britain is mine.
And oh, if Rome wants all her sons and daughters,
how much more does this poor Britain!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But where will you live?</q> broke in the Count’s
daughter; <q>Where will you be safe? Think of the
dreadful things you have gone through within the
last few months! How can you bear to face them
with your friends gone? And, dearest Carna,</q> she
went on, as she clasped her still closer, <q>how can I
live without you?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>My dearest sister,</q> sobbed the girl, <q>don’t make
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>it harder than it is. It breaks my heart to part from
you, but I cannot doubt what my duty is. And I am
not without hope. There are brave men here, and
men who love their country, and I cannot but trust
that they will be able to do something. Of course,
we shall stumble, for we have not been used to go
alone, but I do hope that we shall not fall altogether.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But, Carna, what can you do?</q> said Ælia. <q>You
seem to be sacrificing yourself for nothing.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Not for nothing; it is something if I can only
sit at home and pray. But it must be at home that
I must pray. God would not hear me if I were to
put myself in some safe, comfortable place, and then
pretend to care for the poor people whom I had left
behind.</q>
</p>

<p>
She hurried from the room when she had said
this, as if she could not trust herself against persuasions
that touched her heart so nearly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Carna is right,</q> said the Count, when she had
gone, <q>but I feel as if she were going to her death.</q>
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="26" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XXVI. Farewell!"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XXVI. Farewell!"/>
<head>CHAPTER XXVI.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">FAREWELL!</hi></head>

<p>
The resolution to return to Italy once made, the
Count lost no time in carrying it out. His own preparations
for departure did not cost him much trouble.
He began by offering freedom to all the slaves in his
household. The difficulty was in inducing them to
accept it. So kind a master had he been—in spite
of an occasional outburst of temper—and so uncertain
were the prospects of a quiet life in Britain, that
very few felt any eagerness to be independent, and
the boon had to be forced upon them or made acceptable
by a considerable bribe. With the free
population that since the departure of the legions
had gathered in increasing numbers about the villa
it was still more difficult to deal. Many of them were
quite helpless people whom it seemed equally difficult
to take and to leave behind. To all that were of
Italian birth, or that had kinsfolk or friends on the
Continent who might be reasonably expected to give
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>them a home, the Count offered a passage. For others
employment was found in Londinium and other
towns. But, when all that was possible had been
done, there was a helpless remnant, about whom the
Count felt much as the occupants of the last boat
must feel at the sight of the poor creatures whom
they are forced to leave behind on a sinking ship.
</p>

<p>
Carna had quitted the villa very soon after her
resolution to remain in Britain had been made. It
was indeed too painful to remain there, for, though
the Count had confessed that she was right, his
daughter remained unconvinced, and assailed her
with incessant entreaties and reproaches which went
very near to breaking her heart. She made her home
with the old priest whose wife was a distant kinswoman
of her own, and found, as such tender hearts
always will, a solace for her own sorrows in relieving
the troubles of others.
</p>

<p>
About the middle of September all was ready for a
start. The two serviceable ships that were left to
the Count were loaded to their utmost capacity with
the persons and property of the departing colony.
Their sailing masters had indeed remonstrated as
strongly as they dared.
</p>

<p>
<q>We <hi rend='italic'>may</hi> get safely across,</q> said the senior of
them, <q>if all goes better than we have any right to
expect. But if it comes on to blow we shall hardly
be able to handle our ships; and if we meet with the
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>pirates—well, a man might as well go into battle with
his hands tied.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Count refused to listen to these protests.
Even the suggestion that the cargo should be
divided, and part left for a second voyage he scouted,
<q>It will not do,</q> he said, <q>the poor people would
fancy they were being left behind, and I am not at
all sure that they would not be right. It is only too
likely that if we once get to the other side we should
<hi rend='italic'>not</hi> come back. No! we will sink or swim together.</q>
</p>

<p>
About an hour before noon on the fifteenth of the
month, the crews were ready to weigh anchor. The
Count and his daughter, who had just taken their
last view of the villa which had been their home for
so many years, were standing on the little jetty, ready
to step into the boat that was to convey them to the
ship. Carna and the old priest and his wife were with
them, and the hour of farewell had come. Ælia, if
she had not reconciled herself to separation from her
sister, at least saw that it was inevitable, and was
resolved not to make the parting bitterer than it must
needs be. She affected a cheerfulness which she did
not feel.
</p>

<p>
<q>Good-bye, Carna,</q> she cried, throwing her arms
round the girl’s neck. <q>Good-bye! now we are going
like swallows in the autumn, and very likely shall
come back like them in the spring. Meanwhile keep
the nest as warm for us as you can.</q>
</p>

<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>

<p>
<q>Remember, Carna,</q> said the Count, <q>that you
have a home as long as either I or my daughter have
a roof over our heads. You are doing your duty in
staying, but there is a limit even to duty. As long
as you can be of service, stop; I would not have it
otherwise; but don’t sacrifice yourself and those that
love you for nothing.</q>
</p>

<p>
Carna’s heart was too full to let her speak. She
caught the Count’s hands and kissed them. Then
she turned to Ælia, and taking her gold cross and
chain—the only ornament that she wore—hung
it round her sister’s neck. When she had succeeded
in choking down her sobs, she whispered,
<q>Take this, and, if you will give me yours, we will
bear each other’s crosses, and, perhaps, they will be
a little lighter. But oh, how heavy!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Kneel, my children,</q> said the old priest, and the
little group knelt down, while the rowers in the boat
uncovered their heads. After repeating the paternoster
and a few simple words of prayer, he raised
his hand and blessed them, then fell on his knees
beside them. After two or three minutes of silent
supplication the Count rose, and almost lifted his
daughter into the boat, so broken down was she with
the passion of her grief. Carna remained on her
knees, her face buried in her hands. To have looked
up and seen father and sister go was more than she
dared to do. For the struggle that she fancied was
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>over had begun again in her heart, and she could not
feel sure even then that duty would prevail. The
Count gently laid his hand upon her head and blessed
her, then stepped into the boat. As the rowers
dipped their oars in the water, a gleam of sunshine
burst through the clouds, and lighted as with a glory
the head of the kneeling girl.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="27" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XXVII. Martianus"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XXVII. Martianus"/>
<head>CHAPTER XXVII.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">MARTIANUS.</hi></head>

<p>
The little community that remained in the neighbourhood
of the villa after the departure of the
Count and his household had plenty to occupy their
thoughts and hands. The Count had behaved with
a liberality and a discretion that were both equally
characteristic of him. All the stock of what may be
called the home farm, all the agricultural implements,
the cattle, sheep, and pigs, and as much of the stores
of corn that he could spare, he had made over to the
priest and two other principal persons in the settlement
for the benefit of the community at large.
This was an excellent start, and removed all immediate
anxiety for the future. The stores of provisions
had been increased by opportune purchases before
the resolution to go had been taken, and enough was
left to last, if managed with due economy, over the
coming winter.
</p>

<p>
Carna found plenty of employment of the kind in
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>which she found her greatest pleasure. There was
indeed a terrible gap in her life; not only had she
lost those whom she had loved all her life as father
and sister, but her intellectual interests had dropped
away from her. Many of the books at the villa had
indeed been left with her, but then there was no one
to whom to talk about them. The old priest never
opened a volume except it was a service book; his
wife could not even read. But the time never hung
heavily upon her hands, for there was plenty of work
to do among the sick and sorry. As the autumn went
on an epidemic, which a modern doctor would probably
have described as measles, broke out among the
children, and Carna spent her days and nights in
ministering to the little sufferers. The one relief that
she allowed herself—and there was no little sadness
mixed with the pleasure which it gave her—was to
spend an hour, when she could snatch one from her
many cares, in the deserted rooms of the villa. The
indulgence was rare, not only because her leisure was
infrequent, but because she was conscious of feeling
somewhat relaxed after it for the effort of her daily
life; but when it came it was precious. Not a room,
not a picture on the walls, not a pattern in the tesselated
pavements, that did not call up a hundred associations,
and make the past in which she had enjoyed
so much happiness live again in her fancy. The
dwelling was under the charge of an old couple, who
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>gladly kept it clean in exchange for the shelter of two
or three of the rooms, and Carna was free to wander
about it as she would, while she felt a certain security
in the knowledge that the place was not wholly
deserted.
</p>

<p>
The autumn and winter passed without any incident
of importance. News from the Continent had
never been very regular during that season of the
year, and now it came only at the rarest intervals.
All that the settlement heard went to show that there
was but little chance of the return of the legions.
Constantine, after some changes of fortune, had made
himself master of Gaul and Spain, and had established
a kingdom which looked so much as if it might
last, that he had been regularly acknowledged by
Honorius as a partner in the Empire. But it would
be long before he could spare money or men for
adding Britain to his dominions. From Britain itself
the news was mostly of the most dismal kind. The
Picts, indeed, were not as troublesome as usual.
Happily for their neighbours on the south, their
attention had been occupied by the tribes on the
north, who had been driven by a season of unusual
scarcity to forage for themselves. The robbers, in fact,
had been obliged to defend themselves against being
robbed, and Britain had had in consequence a quiet
time. But the people used it to quarrel among themselves.
There were scores of chiefs who had each
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>his pedigree, by which he traced his lineage to some
king of the pre-Roman days, and which gave him,
he fancied, a title to rule over his neighbours. And
besides these personal jealousies, there was a great
division which split the nation into two hostile factions.
There were Britons, who held to Roman ways, and
among them, to the religion which Rome had given,
and there were Britons who looked back to the old
independent days, and to the faith which their fore-fathers
had held long before the name of Christ had
been heard out of or in the land of His birth. The
former party was by far the more numerous, but its
adherents were those who had suffered most by
Britain’s four centuries of servitude; in the latter the
virtues of freedom had been kept alive by a carefully
cherished tradition. They were few in number; but
they were vigorous and enthusiastic, even fanatical.
It was clear that this strife within would cause at least
as much trouble as would come from enemies without.
</p>

<p>
It was about seven months after the Count’s
departure when Carna paid one of her customary
visits to the villa. She had been unusually busy for
three or four weeks previously, and had not found
time to come. As she passed through the garden, on
her way to the house, she noticed that the place
looked somewhat neater and less neglected than
usual. This, however, did not surprise her, as she
had gently remonstrated with the old keeper for
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>doing so little, and, in her usual kindly way, had
followed up her reproof with a little present.
Accordingly she passed on without thinking more of
the matter to the little sitting-room which she had
once shared with Ælia, and prepared to spend an
hour of quiet enjoyment with a book. Her books,
indeed, she kept for these visits to the villa. Not
only was her time elsewhere closely occupied, but
her hostess, kindly and affectionate as she generally
was, could not conceal her dislike of the volumes
which Carna loved so dearly.
</p>

<p>
In the midst of her reading she was startled by
the unaccustomed sound of footsteps. She lifted
her eyes from the page and saw a sight so unexpected
that for a few moments she could not collect
her thoughts or believe her eyes.
</p>

<p>
The British chief Martianus stood before her.
</p>

<p>
She had seen him last at the Great Temple,
and the recollections of those days and nights of
horror, her capture, her hurried journey, and the
interrupted sacrifice, crowded upon her, and almost
overpowered her. Nor could she help giving one
thought to the question—if this man’s presence
recalls such horrors in the past, what does it not mean
for the future? Still, the courage which had supported
her so bravely before did not fail her now.
She rose from her seat and calmly faced the intruder,
while she waited for him to speak.
</p>

<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>

<p>
Martianus began in a tone of the deepest respect.
<q>Lady, I am truly glad that you condescend to
honour this poor house of mine with your presence.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>This house of yours!</q> repeated the girl, with
astonishment.
</p>

<p>
<q>Lady, doubtless you do not know that this villa
was built by its former owner on land which belonged
to my family, and which was taken from them by
force. I do not speak of the Count—he was too
honourable a man to do anything of the kind—I
speak of the former owner, or so-called owner, from
whom he purchased it. In the Count’s time I said
nothing of my claim. I would not have troubled
him for the world. But now that he has gone, and
practically given up the place, I am justified, I think,
in asserting my ownership.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I know nothing of these matters,</q> said Carna,
coldly, <q>but I will take care not to intrude again.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Intrusion!</q> said the chief. <q>Did I not say
that there is no one who would be more welcome
here? We were friends once, in the good Count’s
time; why should we not be so again? and more,</q> he
added in a whisper.
</p>

<p>
<q>Friends with you! Surely that is impossible.
You cannot wish it yourself, after what has happened.
You seem to forget.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Lady, Carna—I used to call you Carna when
you were a child—I do try to forget that dreadful
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>night. I was overborne by those double-dyed villains,
Carausius and Ambiorix. Believe me, it was
against my will that I took any part in that dreadful
business. And you will remember I never lifted a
hand against you, no, nor against that base champion
of yours. You will do me that justice. Carausius,
thank Heaven! has got his deserts, and I have
broken with Ambiorix.</q>
</p>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: Carna and Martianus.]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><anchor id="fig276"/><figure url="images/i_313.jpg" rend="w100"><index index="fig" level1="Carna and Martianus"/>
<head><hi rend='smallcaps'>Carna and Martianus.</hi></head>
<figDesc>Carna and Martianus</figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<p>
Carna remained silent.
</p>

<p>
Martianus resolved to try another appeal, and,
presuming that the girl’s recollections of the scene
might be confused by fear, did not scruple to depart
considerably from the truth.
</p>

<p>
<q>I implore you to believe that I could not have
allowed that horrible deed to be accomplished. If
that base fellow who had the privilege of saving
you had not appeared, I was ready myself to interfere.
I know that I ought to have done so before;
it has been a ceaseless regret to me that I did
not. But I wanted to keep on terms with those two,
and I held back till the last moment. Forgive me
my irresolution, Carna, but do not believe that I
could have been one of the murderers.</q>
</p>

<p>
The girl’s recollections of the scene, which were
quite free from the confusion which Martianus had
imagined, did not agree with this account of his
behaviour, but she did not think it worth while to
argue the point.
</p>

<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>

<p>
<q>Let it be as you will,</q> she said, with a cold dignity,
<q>but you can imagine that these recollections
are not pleasing to me. And now I will bid you
farewell.</q>
</p>

<p>
She stepped forward as she spoke with the intention
of at once leaving the room, but Martianus
barred the way. Dropping on one knee, he caught
her hand. For a moment Carna, who had still
something of the child in her, felt a strong impulse
to use the hand that was still free in dealing him a
vigorous blow. But her womanly dignity prevailed:
she only wrenched her hand away with something
like violence. There was something in the foppish
appearance and insincere manner of Martianus that
set her more decidedly against him than even the
recollection of the plot in which he had been concerned.
</p>

<p>
<q>I will listen to what you have to say, but do not
touch me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You give me little encouragement,</q> Martianus
began, <q>but still I will speak. I say nothing about
myself, only about my country—your country and
mine. I know how you love it. We have all heard
what sacrifices you have made for it, how you gave
up home and friends sooner than leave it. Make, if
I must put it so, one sacrifice more. You are the
heiress of the great Caradoc, the noblest king that
Britain ever had, whom even the Romans were
com<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>pelled to admire. I can reckon among my ancestors
Cunobelin. Apart our claims might be disputed;
together they will make a title which no one can
dispute to the crown of Britain. Yes, Carna, it is
nothing less than that—the crown of Britain that is
in question.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>A crown does not tempt me,</q> said Carna, looking
the speaker straight in the face.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah! it is not that,</q> replied the suitor; <q>you
mistake me. I never dreamed of tempting you. I
know only too well that it would be impossible.
But think what a British crown really means. It
means a united Britain, strong against the Picts,
strong against the Saxons; and without it—think
what that would mean. Every tribe—for we should
split up into tribes again—for itself; every chief
working for his own hand; the Picts plundering the
inland, the Saxons harrying the coast. Oh, Carna!
as you love your country—I don’t speak of myself,
though that, too, might come in time, if a man’s
devotion is of any avail—but if you love your
country, do not say no.</q>
</p>

<p>
It was a powerful appeal, and touched Carna’s
heart at the point where it was most accessible.
And she was so candid and transparent a soul that
what she felt in her heart she soon showed in her
face.
</p>

<p>
Martianus saw his advantage, but, happily for
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>Carna, did not press it as he might have done. The
fact was that he was so conscious of his own insincerity
and falsehood that his courage failed him,
and he dared not press his suit any further. Had
he gone on, he might have entangled the girl in a
promise which her feeling for truth would not have
permitted her to break, which would have made her
even shut her eyes to the truth. As it was, he
thought it his best policy to rest content with the
progress that he had made. He raised Carna’s hand
respectfully to his lips, and, with a low salutation,
opened the door.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="28" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XXVIII. A Rival"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XXVIII. A Rival"/>
<head>CHAPTER XXVIII.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">A RIVAL.</hi></head>

<p>
It was a fact that Martianus had taken possession
of the villa in the island, on the strength of a claim
which was far less definite than he had chosen to
represent to Carna. But no other owner was forthcoming,
and the place was important in the minds
of the British population as having been the dwelling
of the last representative of Roman power. The
new occupant might seem to have succeeded to the
position of the one who had lately quitted it. It
flattered the man’s vanity, too, to put himself in the
place, so to speak, of the powerful Count of the
Shore, while he could use the appliances of the villa,
which were comfortable and even luxurious, to gratify
his taste for what he called the pleasures of civilized
life. His establishment would probably have failed
to satisfy the fastidious taste of a Roman gentleman;
the cooking was barbarous, and the service generally
rude. Still there was a certain imitation, which
im<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>posed at least upon the ignorant, of Roman refinement,
and Martianus flattered himself that he was
at least a passable successor of Count Ælius.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile he pursued his suit to Carna with a
good deal of craft. He was a diligent attendant
at the village church, and professed to feel such an
interest in the teaching of the old priest that the
ministrations in church must be supplemented by
conversations at home. To Carna he said little or
nothing about his personal claims, but he was
eloquent on the subject of the future of Britain.
About this she was never tired of hearing, and in
hearing him speak of it, which he did with a certain
eloquence, the sense of his falseness and unreality
began to grow fainter in her mind. The maiden
faith which <q>glorifies clown and satyr</q> began to
make this schemer, who indeed was not without
ability and accomplishments, look like a genuine
patriot. As for the priest and his wife, they were
simply captivated by him, and never lost an opportunity
of praising him to their young kinswoman.
On the whole, his suit made some progress. It was
only when he seemed to put forward any personal
claim, or ventured to address to Carna any personal
compliments, that she decidedly shrank from him.
He was quite shrewd enough to see this, and though
it was a very unpleasant experience for his vanity as
well as for his love, he did not fail to guide his
con<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>duct by it. As long as he talked about Britain, its
wrongs in the past, and its hopes for the future, he
was sure of a favourable hearing.
</p>

<p>
Martianus had other things to think of besides his
suit to Carna. As he said, he had broken entirely
with Ambiorix. He had found that the strength
of the old Druid party had been greatly exaggerated,
and that in fact the time for its revival had gone by
for ever. Any chance, too, of even temporary success
that it might have had had been lost with the life
of Carausius. The priest had held many threads of
secret intrigue in his hands, and there was no one to
take them up, when they dropped from his hand. And
Ambiorix, besides being worth but little as an ally,
had wanted too much, for he was not of a temper to
be satisfied with the second place.
</p>

<p>
Still Martianus was well aware that his rival
would have to be reckoned with sooner or later.
If he could induce Carna to become his wife, and
thus unite her family claim to his own, this reckoning
might be got through with care and success. If he
had to rely upon himself the chances would be
decidedly less favourable. The dilemma in which
he found himself was this. On the one hand, to
hasten his suit might be to ruin it altogether;
Carna, too, might fairly ask him for something more
substantial than his own assertion of his pretensions.
On the other hand, there was the danger of being
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>attacked and crushed before he could make his
appeal to the country. Ambiorix, he knew, was a
man of even desperate courage, and would not suffer
himself to be effaced without a struggle.
</p>

<p>
Martianus did his best to guard himself against
this danger. He strengthened the fortifications
which the Count had made round the villa, laid
up a store of provisions which might be sufficient
for a prolonged siege, and used all his resources—he
was one of the richest men in Britain—to get
together as large and effective a garrison as possible.
</p>

<p>
These precautions were not taken a day too soon.
About the beginning of June he received intelligence
from his agents on the mainland that Ambiorix was
preparing to attack him. He hurried at once with
the news to the priest’s house.
</p>

<p>
<q>You know,</q> he said, <q>that my house has always
been at your disposal, but, much as I should have
liked to receive you as my guests, I would not
press the invitation upon you. But now, in the face
of what I have just heard, your coming is a necessity.
Ambiorix and his followers are almost on the way to
attack us, and there is no place of safety but the
villa.</q>
</p>

<p>
The proposition was most distasteful to Carna,
who shuddered at the thought of entering her old
home in such society. At first she was disposed to
be generally incredulous, knowing that Martianus
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>was not incapable of exaggerating, and even of inventing,
when he had an object to serve. Compelled,
by the proofs which the chief advanced, to
acknowledge that the danger was real, she took
refuge in the argument that <q>it did not concern
them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>We are too insignificant to be harmed,</q> she
said.
</p>

<p>
<q>Pardon me, Carna,</q> replied Martianus. <q>You
surely know better than that about yourself. And
if, as I can easily believe, you are careless on your
own account, think of your host. There is nothing
that Ambiorix hates with so deadly a hatred as a
Christian priest.</q>
</p>

<p>
The old priest, a worthy man, but not of the stuff
of which martyrs are made, was terribly alarmed
at this statement. Carna, too, was compelled to
acknowledge that this fear was not without reason,
and reluctantly consented to the removal. Her mind
once made up, she found abundance of occupation
in making it as little grievous to others as might be.
The villa could not hold any great number of inmates
in addition to the garrison, and of course it
was necessary that the number of non-combatants
should be as small as possible. Some of the inhabitants
of the settlement could, of course, remain
safely in their homes. They had little or nothing
to be robbed of, and the expected assailants had no
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>other reason for harming them. But many households
had to be broken up, and as only very few
could be received at the villa, there were many
painful scenes to be gone through, and Carna was
unceasingly busy giving all the comfort and help
that she could. Martianus, who was not unkindly
in temper, put all his resources at her disposal, and
his readiness to assist put him higher in her favour
than he had ever been before.
</p>

<p>
Nor was she sorry that she had found shelter
within the fortifications of the villa when the next
morning revealed the presence of the invaders.
They had come across in the night to the number
of several hundreds, and could be seen from the
windows of the villa. And a very singular sight
they were. A spectator might have imagined himself
to have been carried back more than four centuries
and a half, and to be looking on the hosts which had
gathered to oppose the landing of the first Cæsar.
These warriors who came up shouting to the palisade
which formed the outer defence of the villa seemed
to be absolute barbarians; no one could have believed
that for many generations they had been subjects
of a civilized power. They had, in fact, deliberately
thrown off all the signs of that subjection. It was
the dream of Ambiorix to have Britain such as she
might have been had Rome never conquered her. It
was a hopeless attempt, this rolling back the course
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>of time by four centuries, but in such matters as
dress and equipment something could be done.
Accordingly, his troops were such as the troops
of Cassibelan might have been had they suddenly
risen from their graves. Most of them were naked
to the waist; what clothing they had was chiefly of
skins, though some wore gaily-coloured trews. All
wore their hair falling over their shoulders, and long,
drooping moustaches, but no beard or whisker. All
the exposed parts of their bodies were dyed a deep
indigo-blue, by the application of woad. Ambiorix
had been very anxious to revive the chariots of his
ancestors, but had been compelled to give up the
idea. In any case he could not have transported
them to the island. He had been at great pains to
instruct them in the genuine British war-cries, as far
as tradition had preserved them. Here, again, the
result had been somewhat disappointing. There
were things which they had learnt from Rome which
they could not put off as easily as their dress; and
the challenges which they shouted out to the besieged
as they surged up to the defences were a
curious mixture of the British and Latin tongues.
</p>

<p>
The battle at first went decidedly against the
assailants. The Count had left behind him a catapult
among other effects which he had not thought
it worth while to remove; and Martianus, who had
practised some of the garrison in the use of it,
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>brought it
<anchor id="corr288"/><corr sic="inot">into</corr> play with considerable effect. The
very first discharge killed one of the lesser chiefs,
and a little later in the day Ambiorix himself was
badly bruised by one of the stones propelled from it.
Meanwhile the defenders escaped almost wholly
without injury. There was no need for them to
leave the shelter of the buildings. As long as they
kept within this the bows and slings of the enemy
failed to harm them. One or two rash young recruits
exposed themselves unnecessarily, and were
wounded in consequence; but when Ambiorix, about
an hour before sunset, called off his men, the garrison
found that the casualties had been very slight and
few.
</p>

<p>
During the night the besiegers were not idle.
They constructed a mantelet<note place="foot">Mantelet: a shield of wood, metal, or rope, for the protection
of sappers, &amp;c.</note> of wicker work
covered with stout hides, and brought it out close to
the palisade—an operation which the besieged, with
a culpable carelessness, allowed them to do unmolested.
From under cover of this they plied long
poles, armed at the ends with blades of steel (for
Ambiorix was not so obstinate a conservative as to
go back to the axe of bronze), and hacked away at
the palisade. The catapult produced no effect
on this erection, and though arrows, discharged
almost perpendicularly into the air so as to fall just
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>on the other side of it, inflicted some injury, the
work went on without interruption. Martianus,
seeing this, headed a sally in person, and, after a
sharp struggle, succeeded in possessing himself of it.
The wicker work was broken in pieces, and the hides
carried off within the line of defences.
</p>

<p>
The next three days passed without incident, and
the inmates of the villa began to hope that the
danger had passed over. In reality, however, the
besiegers were collecting materials for the construction
of another mantelet on a much larger scale.
As much of this as was possible was put together
out of sight of the villa, and on the morning of the
fourth day an erection of considerable size could be
seen about fifty yards from the palisade. It soon
became evident that the new plan of the assailants
was to try the effect of fire. Arrows were wrapped
round with tow, and, when this had been lighted,
were discharged into the enclosure. Some mischief
was done, not so much to the buildings, for it was
not difficult to put out the fire if the arrows happened
to fall on an inflammable place, but to the garrison.
The men who had to extinguish the flames could not
avoid exposing themselves, and those who exposed
themselves were frequently hit by the slingers and
archers. On the whole, however, little progress was
made, and when, in the course of the evening, a
heavy rain came on, and the wind, which had
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>hitherto assisted the flames, altogether died away,
the discharge ceased.
</p>

<p>
It was now necessary for Ambiorix to bring
matters to a crisis. His followers had nearly exhausted
the store of provisions which they had
brought with them, and, as he was unwilling to
alienate the inhabitants of the island by resorting to
plunder, he did not see how he could replenish it.
Nothing remained, therefore, but to try a direct
assault, and this he did in the early dawn of the
sixth day after his arrival. Under cover of a heavy
mist which rolled in from the sea, and helped by the
neglect of the sentinels, who, never very watchful,
had relaxed their care altogether when the light
became visible, he brought his men close up to the
palisade at the spot where an opening had been left,
closed with a strong gate. For a few minutes, such
was the supineness of the garrison, the assailants
were allowed to batter and hew at this undisturbed.
When some of the defenders had been rallied to the
spot, the work was more than half done. Ambiorix,
who was now entirely recovered from the injury
received on the first day of the siege, plied his axe
with extraordinary energy, and his immediate followers,
whom he had carefully selected for their
courage and strength, followed his example. By
the time Martianus arrived on the scene the gate
had been broken down, and the assailants were pouring
into the enclosure.
</p>

<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>

<p>
The garrison, who were outnumbered in the proportion
of nearly three to one, were at once ordered to
fall back into the quadrangle of the villa. They formed
a line across the open side where they were covered
by the archers and slingers posted on the roofs of
the various buildings. Here a long and fierce struggle
ensued. The defenders had some advantage in
their position, and were better drilled and disciplined;
the assailants, on the other hand, had the courage of
fanaticism. When an hour had passed, and the
combatants, by mutual consent, paused to take breath,
both sides had lost many in killed and wounded, but
neither had gained any considerable advantage.
</p>

<p>
Carna meanwhile had been busy ministering to the
needs of the wounded, and was scarcely aware of the
true position of affairs, the room in which she was at
work not commanding a view of the space in which
the struggle was going on. Chancing, however, to
leave it for a moment in search of something which
she wanted for her work, she saw what had taken
place. In a moment her resolution was taken.
During the siege her thoughts had been taken up, not
with the danger to herself and the other inmates of the
villa, but with the terrible fact that Britons were
fighting against Britons. Long before she would
have attempted to put an end to their cruel strife, if
she had seen any hope of success. She would not
have hesitated risking her life in the attempt.
In<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>deed she had proposed to Martianus that she should
go with a party bearing a flag of truce, and seek an
interview with the hostile commander. He had met
her with a courteous and peremptory refusal, and
she had been compelled to acquiesce. But now it
seemed to her that her chance was come. Taking
advantage of the pause in the struggle, she ran
between the combatants, and threw herself on her
knees with her face towards the assailants.
</p>

<p>
A murmur of astonishment and admiration ran
through both the ranks. She seemed to be a visitor
from another world, so strange, so unexpected, and,
at the same time, so beautiful was her appearance.
</p>

<p>
<q>Britons, brothers,</q> she cried, in a sweet but
penetrating voice, which made itself heard through
the throng, <q>what is this? Britons, brothers, have
you forgotten what you are? Your masters have left
you. You carry arms which have been forbidden to
you for more than four hundred years, and must you
first use them against your own countrymen? Have
you no enemies abroad that you must look for them
at home?</q>
</p>

<p>
A shriek of terror, followed by a wild war cry,
which, though strange to many of the crowd, was
only too familiar to the dwellers on the coast, gave a
fearful emphasis to her words. The enemies from
without were there.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="29" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XXIX. An Unexpected Arrival"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XXIX. An Unexpected Arrival"/>
<head>CHAPTER XXIX.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">AN UNEXPECTED ARRIVAL.</hi></head>

<p>
Cedric, after making good his escape from the
villa, as has been related, had nearly died of hunger
on the shore to which he had managed to make his
way. When he was almost at his last gasp, a
Saxon galley had touched at the very spot to
supply itself with water. Fortunately for him it
was commanded by a kinsman of his own, who
persuaded the crew—the Saxon adventurers had
to be dealt with by persuasion rather than by command—to
return home with their passenger. This
probably saved his life; his mother, a skilful leech,
whose fame was spread abroad among the dwellers
on the coast, nursed him back into health. Still he
had suffered long and much; and it was not till the
summer was far advanced that he was allowed to join
an expedition. His noble birth, his reputation for
strength and courage, not a little enhanced, of course,
by his late escape, and the personal fascination that
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>he exercised on all about him, pointed him out, young
as he was, for command.
</p>

<p>
Carna had been unceasingly in his thoughts since
the day when he had last seen her. During the
delirium of his illness her name had been continually
on his lips, and one of the earliest confidences of his
recovery was the story of his love for this Christian
maiden of the west. His mother was touched
by the story. The girl’s passionate desire for the
welfare of the son that was dead (which she appreciated
without comprehending its motive), and
the very heroism which the son that was living had
shown in defending her, combined to move her heart.
That any living woman could resist the attraction of
such a champion as her son, she did not believe for a
moment, in spite of all that Cedric could say about
the height of saintliness on which Carna stood; and
by degrees the young chief himself found his worshipping
devotion mingled with hopes that were very
sweet to his heart.
</p>

<p>
It is not surprising, therefore, that as soon as he
was at sea, and the destination of their voyage became
a question, his thoughts at once turned to the
island. Approaching it with caution, for he was too
good a leader to risk an encounter with the superior
force of the Roman squadron, he learnt with surprise
that the Count had departed. Of Carna his informant,
a fisherman who found it answer his purpose to
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>give what information he could to the Saxons, could
tell him nothing, and Cedric naturally supposed that
she had gone with the family into which she had been
adopted. The news struck a strange chill into his
heart, but at the same time it relieved him of considerable
perplexity. His course was now clear; if
the Romans were gone there was nothing to be
feared. He knew the approaches to the villa, and
how weak were its defences, and he felt sure that a
British garrison would not be a match for his own
vigorous Saxons.
</p>

<p>
He reached the island two days after the landing
of Ambiorix. Acting as his own spy on the strength
of his knowledge of the country, he soon found
out the position of affairs, and thought that he could
not do better than wait to see how things would turn
out. The galleys—Cedric had two under his command—lay
in hiding at some little distance from the
Haven, and meanwhile every detail of the struggle
was watched, unknown to the combatants, by scouts
who carried news of its progress to their chief. The
gathering of the troops previous to the attack on the
fortifications had been observed and rightly understood
by these men. Cedric had been at once informed
of what was in progress, had landed his
crews, amounting in all to about two hundred, and
marched with all the speed that was possible to the
scene of action. As the news had reached him not
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>long after midnight he was able to reach the spot
very soon after the attack had commenced.
</p>

<p>
The battle-cry of the Saxons, terrible to those who
knew it, scarcely less terrible, with its shrillness and
fierceness, to those to whom it was strange, arrested
the attention of all, and made every eye turn to the
rear of the attacking party. There could be seen,
running swiftly up the ascent which led to the
palisade, the band of Saxons. In front a huge
standard-bearer carried a blood-red banner, on which
was wrought in black the raven of Odin. Behind
him came, in a loose order which served to conceal
their scanty number, Cedric’s warriors, a sturdy
race, whose tall stature was made to seem almost
gigantic by the height to which their hair was dressed.
They were formidable foes, but still there were brave
men in both the British parties who would have had
the courage to stand up against them. Unhappily one
of the panics which defy all reason and all individual
courage began among the inland Britons at the
sight of these strange enemies; and, once begun, it
could not be checked. Ambiorix, indeed, with a few
of his immediate followers, faced the enemy, but
was quickly swept away by the rush of their onset.
Martianus, with some of the garrison, carrying Carna
along with him, took refuge in the villa, and hastily
secured the doors. Others fled wildly over the country,
or hid themselves in the out-buildings. Nowhere was
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>there any thought of resistance, and the Saxons won
their victory almost without losing a drop of blood.
</p>

<p>
Cedric’s eyes, sharpened as they were by love, had
caught a glimpse of Carna, as she was swept in the
throng of fugitives within the doors of the villa, and
he at once led his men to the attack. Any defence
of the place against assailants so determined would
have been hopeless, even had the garrison been as
resolute as they were, in fact, feeble and demoralized.
A few sturdy blows from Cedric’s battle-axe brought
the principal door to the ground, and he rushed across
the fragments into the hall, followed by some ten of
his attendants. The rest he had signed to remain
without. Carna, who, herself undismayed amidst all
the tumult, was surrounded by a group of terrified
men and women, stood facing him. The crimson
mounted to her forehead as she met his eyes, for she
saw, as no woman could fail to see, the love that was
in them; but she showed no other sign of emotion.
</p>

<p>
<q>Spare these poor creatures,</q> she said, pointing
to her terrified companions.
</p>

<p>
<q>Your lives are safe,</q> said Cedric in British. <q>Go
with this <anchor id="corr297"/><corr sic="(quote mark missing)">man,</corr></q> and he pointed to one of his attendants,
to whom at the same time he gave some brief
directions. He turned to Carna: <q>Lady,</q> he said,
<q>this is no time for many words; and I could not
say them if it were, for my tongue is ill-taught in
your language. But you cannot have failed to see
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>my heart. It is yours, and all that I have. Come
and be a queen in my home and among my people.</q>
</p>

<p>
The girl’s eyes, which she had turned to the
ground at his first address, were now lifted to meet
his gaze. <q>I cannot leave my people,</q> she said.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yet,</q> he answered, <q>the good women of whom
you used to tell me, whose lives are written in that
holy book of yours, left their own people to follow
their husbands.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, but the God of the husbands whom they
followed was the God whom they worshipped in
their own homes. You worship strange gods, with
whom I can have no fellowship.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Come with me and teach the truth to my people
and me,</q> cried the young man, feeling that there
was nothing which he would not do to win this
bright, brave, beautiful maiden.
</p>

<p>
<q>Listen, Cedric,</q> she answered—it was the first time
that she had called him by his name, and he thought
that he had never known before what a name it
was—<q>You told me some time since that you would
sooner go into the everlasting darkness with your
own people than bow the knee to a God whom you
believed to have dealt unjustly with them. It was a
noble resolve; and I have honoured you for it. Will
you give it up for the love of a woman? If you did,
I could honour you no more, and you are too good to
have a wife that did not honour you. No, Cedric, I
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>will pray for you. Perhaps God will hear me, and
give you light, and bring us together to the blessed
Christ, but it cannot be here.</q>
</p>

<p>
She caught his right hand which he had reached
out in the earnestness of his speaking, and lifted it
to her lips. Her kiss was the last expression of her
gratitude. And perhaps there was something in it
of a woman’s love. But she never faltered for one
instant in the resolve that was to separate them.
</p>

<p>
Behind Cedric stood a burly, middle-aged warrior,
his father’s foster-brother. He had watched the
scene with an intense interest, and though of course
he could not understand what was said, had a very
shrewd notion of the turn which affairs were taking.
Perhaps he saw, too, expressed in the girl’s tone
something of a feeling which the young man was
too rapt in his adoration to observe. Anyhow, he was
ill-content that his young chief should miss the
bride on whom his heart was set, and who seemed
so worthy of him.
</p>

<p>
<q>A noble maiden!</q> he whispered to Cedric, <q>and
fit to be the wife and mother of kings; and I think
that she loves you. Shall we carry her off? I
warrant that it will not be long before she forgives
us.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Peace!</q> said Cedric, turning fiercely upon him,
<q>Peace! Would you have me wed a slave? My
wife must come to me freely, or come not at all.</q>
</p>

<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>

<p>
He spoke to Carna again. <q>Your will is my law.
If you say that we must part, I go. But, lady, you
must leave this house. My people are set upon
burning it, and I could not hinder them, if I would.</q>
</p>

<p>
Without another word, she obeyed his bidding, and
passed into the court, followed by Cedric and his
attendants.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile some of the Saxon crews had been
busy with their torches, and the flames were beginning
to gain a mastery over the building. Before
many minutes had passed the sheds and outbuildings,
which were, to a great extent, constructed of wood,
were in a blaze, while dense volumes of smoke rolled
out of the windows of the villa itself. Carna stood
spellbound by the sight, at once so terrible and so
grand. The spectacle of a burning house exercises
a curious fascination even on those for whom it
means loss and disaster, and Carna, even in that
supreme crisis of her life, could not help gazing at
the conflagration, and even admiring unconsciously
the splendid contrasts of light and darkness which it
produced.
</p>

<p>
It seemed as if that day was about to sweep away
all her past. She had torn from her heart her half-acknowledged
love; she saw the home of her childhood
and youth vanishing into smoke and ashes;
and now another actor in the bygone of her life was
to disappear for ever.
</p>

<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>

<p>
Martianus had observed the scene from the
chamber in which he had taken refuge, and had
misunderstood it. He fancied that the girl, whom,
though no formal betrothal had bound her to him,
he regarded as his own, was going of her own
accord with this Saxon robber, in whom, of course,
he recognized the champion who had saved her life
at the Great Temple. The thought stung him to
madness. With all his foppery and frivolity, he had
the courage of his race. He might probably have
escaped unnoticed from the burning building. But,
disdaining flight, he rushed at Cedric, heedless of
the odds which he was challenging.
</p>

<p>
The chief’s followers, knowing their master’s temper,
stood aside to let the conflict be decided without
their interference. It was fierce, but it was brief.
Martianus was a skilled swordsman, but a life of
indolence, if not of excess, had slackened his sinews
and unsteadied his nerves. He parried some of his
antagonist’s blows with sufficient adroitness, but his
defence grew weaker and weaker, and he could not
save himself from one or two severe wounds. Giving
way before the fierce, unremitting attack of his
antagonist, he came without knowing it to the edge
of the well, stumbled over the raised parapet that
surrounded it, and fell headlong into its depths.<note place="foot">A skeleton has been found in the well of the Brading
Villa.</note>
</p>

<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>

<p>
The sight of the conflict had diverted Carna’s attention
from the burning house. She did not wait to see
its issue, but at once quitted the precincts of the
villa. Some of the survivors of the garrison, the old
priest and his wife, and the rest of the non-combatants,
followed her. Not only did they feel that it was she
who had saved them from the swords of the Saxons,
but they recognized in her calmness and courage the
qualities of a true leader, and were sure that they
could not do better than follow her guidance. Her
own plans had been formed for some time. She saw
that the strength of Britain was in the great cities.
If the country, disorganized as it was, was to be
made capable again of order and self-defence, the
impulse must come from them, the centres of its
civil and religious life. Londinium, where the
Count’s name was well-known and respected, and
where she had some connections of her own, was
her destination. There she hoped to be able to do
something for her people.
</p>

<p>
The first step was to leave the neighbourhood of
the villa, and with the helpless companions who
now, she saw, looked to her for guidance, to make
her way to the north of the island, and from thence
to the mainland. Making a short pause till the
stragglers had come up, she addressed a few words
of counsel and comfort to the fugitives.
</p>

<p>
<q>Dear friends,</q> she said, <q>God has delivered us
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>from the hands of the heathen, and will bring us safe
to the haven where we would be. But this is no
place for us. We will go to where we may serve
Him in peace and quietness.</q>
</p>

<p>
Her clear, firm tones, which seemed inspired with
all the confidence of an unfaltering faith, seemed to
breathe in their turn new courage into the terrified
crowd. They received them with a murmur of
assent, and without an expression of fear or doubt,
followed her as she led the way to the summit of
the neighbouring downs.
</p>

<p>
Arrived at this spot, she paused and turned, as if
to take a last look at the scenes in which her past
life had been spent. The landscape lay calm and
smiling about her. Every feature in it was familiar
to her eyes; there was not one with which she had
not some happy association. But now the sight had
lost its power; her soul was occupied with more
profound emotions. The home of her childhood lay
beneath her feet, a blackened ruin; and there, upon
the sea, could be seen flashing in the sunlight the
oars of the Saxons’ departing galleys.
</p>

<p>
It was a contrast full of significance, and the girl, in
whose pure and enthusiastic soul there seemed to be
something of a prophetic power, caught some of its
meaning. That ruined house was the past, the days
of the Roman domination. It had had its uses, it had
done its work, but it had become corrupt and feeble,
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>and it was passing away for ever. And the future
was there, symbolized in the Saxon ships that,
brightened by the sunshine, were speeding their
way, instinct, as it seemed, with a vigorous and
hopeful life, across the waters. That was the new
power that was to shake this worn-out civilization,
and raise in the course of the ages a fair fabric of
its own.
</p>

<p>
For the moment the present, with all its misery
and desolation, mastered the girl’s spirit with an
overpowering sense of loss. Thoughts of her ruined
home, her helpless country, and her own personal
loss, though almost unacknowledged to herself, in
the final parting with the young hero of her life,
came upon her with a force which broke down all
her fortitude. She covered her face with her hands
and wept.
</p>

<p>
Then her fortitude and her conscience reasserted
themselves. <q>Courage, my friends,</q> she cried,
<q>God hath not deserted us, nor our dear country.
We have sinned much, and we shall have much to
bear. But He has chosen this land for a great work,
and He will make all things work together for good
till He has accomplished it.</q> She was silent for a
few moments. When she began to speak again,
some mighty inspiration seemed to carry her beyond
the present and out of herself. <q>Yes,</q> she cried,
<q>God hath great things in store for this dear
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>country of ours. I see a great blackness of darkness.
From many houses, great and fair, where the
rulers of the land lived delicately, shall go up to
heaven the smoke of a great burning, and the fields
shall be untilled and desolate, and the rivers shall
run red with blood. But beyond the darkness I see
a light, and the light shines upon a land that is fair
as the garden of the Lord; and therein I behold great
cities thronged with men, and in the midst of them
stately houses of God, such as have never yet been
built by skill of human hand. And the people that
work and worship there are not of our race, nor yet
wholly strange. For the Lord shall make to Himself
a people from out of them that know Him not,
even from the rovers of the sea; they that pull
down His Church shall build it again, and they shall
carry His name to many lands, for the sea shall be
covered with their ships; and they shall rule over the
nations from the one end of heaven to the other.</q>
</p>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: Carna on the Hillside.]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><anchor id="fig304"/><figure url="images/i_343.jpg" rend="w100"><index index="fig" level1="Carna on the Hillside"/>
<head><hi rend='smallcaps'>Carna on the Hillside.</hi></head>
<figDesc>Carna on the Hillside</figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<p>
She sank upon her knees, and remained wrapt
in prayer, while the crowd stood round and watched
her with awe-stricken faces. When she rose again
to her feet she was calm. Resolutely she set her
face from the scene of her past life, and went her
way to meet the future that lay before her.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="30" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XXX. At Last"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XXX. At Last"/>
<head>CHAPTER XXX.<lb/><lb/><hi rend="smaller">AT LAST.</hi></head>

<p>
It was nearly sunset on the second day of the great
battle of Badon Hill.<note place="foot">The battle of Badon Hill, fought in 451, seems to be a
well authenticated historical fact. King Arthur defeated the
Saxons after a fierce conflict which lasted for two days. Badon
Hill is near Bath.</note> The long, desperate fight
was over, and the great British champion had turned
back for a time the tide of Saxon invasion. The
heathen dead lay, rank by rank, as they had fallen,
every man in his place, in the great wedge-like
formation which had resisted all the efforts of the
Britons during the first day of the struggle, and had
been with difficulty broken through on the second.
</p>

<p>
The King was sitting amidst a circle of his knights
on the top of the hill, resting from his toils. His cross-hilted
sword stood fixed in the ground before him. On
one side lay his helmet, bearing for its crest a dragon
wrought in gold; on the other, his shield, on which
was blazoned the figure of the Virgin.
</p>

<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>

<p>
A priest approached, walking in front of a party of
four who were carrying a litter, and who, at a sign
from their leader, set it down before the King.
</p>

<p>
<q>My lord,</q> said the priest, <q>I was traversing the
field to see whether I could serve any of the wounded
with my ministrations, when word was brought to
me that a Saxon desired to talk with me. He could
speak the British tongue, it was told me, a thing
almost unheard of among these barbarians. I did
not delay to visit the man, and finding that he
desired above all things to speak to your lordship, I
took it upon myself to order that he should be
brought.</q>
</p>

<p>
The wounded man raised himself with some
difficulty, and by the help of one of the bearers, into
a sitting posture. He was of almost gigantic proportions,
and though his hair and beard were white
as snow, showed little of the waste and emaciation
of age.
</p>

<p>
One of the King’s knights recognized him at once.
</p>

<p>
<q>I noted him,</q> said he, <q>for a long time during
the battle. He was in the front rank, and stood
close to a young chief, whose guardian he seemed to
be. I observed that he was content to ward off blows
that were aimed at the young man, but never dealt
any himself. What came to him and his charge
afterwards I do not know, for the tide of battle
carried me away.</q>
</p>

<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>

<p>
<q>What do you want?</q> said the King.
</p>

<p>
<q>My lord King,</q> said the old man, speaking
British fluently, though with a foreign accent, <q>the
knight speaks true. Neither to-day, nor yesterday,
nor indeed through all the years during which my
people have fought with yours, have I stained my
hands with British blood. Indeed for forty years I
have not set foot on this island. But this year I was
constrained to come, for the young Prince of my
people, Logrin by name, was with the army, and his
father had given him into my charge, and I could
not leave him. All day, therefore, I stood by him,
and warded off the blows with such strength and skill
as I had, and when his death hour came, for he fell
on the morning of the second day, I cared no more
for my own life. So much I say that you may listen
to me the more willingly, though report says of you
that you are generous, not to friends only, but also
to foes. But I have something to say that is of more
moment. Many years ago I was a prisoner in this
land, having been taken by one of the ships of Count
Ælius. Many things happened to me during my
sojourn here of which it does not concern me to
speak, except of this. There was in the household
of the Count a maiden, his daughter by adoption,
but of British birth, Carna by name. She was very
anxious to bring me to faith in her Master, Christ;
and I was no little moved by her words, and still
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>more by the example of her goodness. But I loved
her, and this love seemed to hinder me, for how
could I tell whether it were truth itself or the love
that was persuading me? And would not he be the
basest of men who for love of a woman should leave
the faith of his fathers? So I remained, though it
was half against my own mind, in my unbelief,
and when she would not take me for her husband,
being unbaptized, we parted, and I saw her no more.
But her words, and the memory of her, have dwelt
with me unceasingly, and now that God has brought
me back to this land, I desire to have that which once
I refused. But tell me, my lord King, have you any
knowledge of this lady Carna?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes,</q> said the King, <q>I know her well, and by
the ordering of God, as I do not doubt, she is in this
very place this day, for she gives her whole time to
ministering to such as are in trouble or sorrow. She
shall be sent for forthwith, and the archbishop also,
who will, if he thinks fit, administer to you the holy
rite of baptism.</q>
</p>

<p>
Cedric, for as my readers will have guessed it was
he, bowed his head in assent, and after swallowing a
cordial which the King’s physician put to his lips,
sank back upon the litter.
</p>

<p>
In about half an hour Carna appeared. She was
dressed in the garb of a religious house, for she had
taken the vows, and she was followed by a small
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>company of holy women who, like her, had devoted
their lives to the service of their poor and suffering
brothers and sisters in Christ. Time had dealt
gently with her, as he often does with gentle souls.
The glossy chestnut hair of the past was changed
indeed to a silvery white, and her face was wasted
with fast and vigil; but her complexion was clear
and delicate as of old, and her eyes as lustrous and
deep.
</p>

<p>
When she saw and recognized the wounded man—for
she did recognize him at once—a sweet and
tender smile came over her face. Her gift of intuition
seemed to tell her that her prayers were
answered, and that the soul for which her supplications
had gone up day by day, from youth to age,
had been given to her.
</p>

<p>
<q>Carna,</q> said the dying man, <q>God has brought
me back to you after many years, and before it is too
late. Your God is my God, and your country my
country—but not here. Once I could not own it,
fearing lest my love should be leading me into falsehood;
but all things are now made clear. But, my
lord King,</q> he went on, feebly turning his head to
Arthur, <q>bid them make haste, for I would be
baptized before I die, and my time is short.</q>
</p>

<p>
The priest had departed on another errand, and
the King was perplexed. The physician whispered
in his ear—
</p>

<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>

<p>
<q>He has not many moments to live.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Baptize him, my lord King, yourself,</q> said Carna;
<q>it is lawful in case of need, and none can do it more
fittingly.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I will willingly be his sponsor,</q> said the knight
who had first spoken, <q>for there was never braver
man wielded axe or sword.</q>
</p>

<p>
The King dipped his hand in a golden cup that
stood on the table by his chair, sprinkled the water
thrice on the dying man, as he pronounced the
solemn formula, and signed on his forehead the
sign of the Cross. He then put the cross-shaped
hilt of his sword to the lips of the newly baptized.
Cedric devoutly kissed it. The next minute he was
dead.
</p>

<p rend="margin-top: 5; text-align: center">
THE END.
</p>

<p rend="margin-top: 5; text-align: center; font-size: small">
UNWIN BROTHERS, LIMITED, PRINTERS, WOKING AND LONDON.
</p>
        </div></body>
        <back>
<div>
        <pgIf output="pdf">
        <then/>
        <else>
        <div id="footnotes" rend="page-break-before: right">
        <index index="toc" level1="Footnotes"/>
        <head>Footnotes</head>
        <divGen type="footnotes"/>
        </div>
        </else>
        </pgIf>
        </div>
<div rend="page-break-before:right; x-class: boxed">
        <index index="pdf" level1="Transcriber's Note"/><index index="toc" level1="Transcriber’s Note"/>
        <head>Transcriber’s Note</head>
          <p>Variations in hyphenation (<q>countryside</q>, <q>country-side</q>;
<q>headquarters</q>, <q>head-quarters</q>)
            have not been changed.</p>
        <p>Other changes, which have been made to the text:</p>
        <list>
          <item><ref target="corr019">page 19</ref>, <q>tomount</q> changed to <q>to mount</q></item>
<item><ref target="corr023">page 23</ref>, quote mark added after <q>mishap.</q></item>
<item><ref target="corr033">page 33</ref>, <q>Lasetrygones</q> changed to <q>Laestrygones</q></item>
<item><ref target="corr076">page 76</ref>, <q>asid</q> changed to <q>said</q></item>
<item><ref target="corr079">page 79</ref>, quote mark added after <q>letter-carriers.</q></item>
<item><ref target="corr087">page 87</ref>, single quote mark changed to double quote mark after <q>long.</q></item>
<item><ref target="corr111">page 111</ref>, <q>oga</q> changed to <q>toga</q></item>
<item><ref target="corr115">page 115</ref>, quote mark added after <q>free.</q></item>
<item><ref target="corr139">page 139</ref>, quote mark added after <q>wanted.</q></item>
<item><ref target="corr156">page 156</ref>, <q>eemed</q> changed to <q>seemed</q></item>
<item><ref target="corr157">page 157</ref>, <q>greal</q> changed to <q>great</q></item>
<item><ref target="corr178">page 178</ref>, period added after <q>Sorbiodunum</q>,
comma changed to period after <ref target="corr178a"><q>them</q></ref></item>
<item><ref target="corr233">page 233</ref>, quote mark added after <q>man.</q></item>
<item><ref target="corr255">page 255</ref>, <q>Or</q> changed to <q>On</q></item>
<item><ref target="corr288">page 288</ref>, <q>inot</q> changed to <q>into</q></item>
<item><ref target="corr297">page 297</ref>, quote mark added after <q>man,</q></item>

        </list>    
        </div>
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
        <divGen type="pgfooter"/>
        </div>
        </back>
    </text>
</TEI.2>
